                           MASTER README FILE
                                 for the
                         Dartmouth Dante Project

This directory contains documentation for the Dartmouth Dante
Project. README files in other major directories typically point to one
of the files here.  

                           The Big Picture

There are three computers (or groups of computers) in the Dartmouth
Dante Project: staff's personal computers, the web applications server,
and the Oracle database server. The personal computers are located in
the owners offices or homes; the servers are located at the Dartmouth
Computing Services data center in Hanover, NH.

Project staff use their personal computers, along with auxilliary
equipment such as optical scanners, to acquire, convert, and edit
commentary texts. See README.Conversions for details.

The web applications server, currently webapp.Dartmouth.EDU, is the
central repository for the project.  The "dante" home directory on
this Linux server contains plain ASCII text files representing all
the commentaries in the project, organized by commentary, cantica, and
canto. It also contains the makefiles and text conversion scripts used
to load the text files into the SQL (Oracle) database. See README.Loading
for details.

The web applications server also provides the user web interface for
the project. Dante.Dartmouth.EDU is a virtual host defined to the Apache
web server on this machine. The "dante" home directory contains the HTML
files that define the web interface.

The searchable text of the project is a SQL full-text database housed
on the Dartmouth Computing Services Oracle database, currently on the
"copper" production database.  The web applications server access the
SQL database via the campus network using Oracle utilities for loading
and managing the text and using SQL*Net calls from the user interface
HTML files to retrieve and display text. See README.SQL for details.

In addition to the production applications and SQL servers, there
is an almost identical development system currently using the web
applications server cobweb.Dartmouth.EDU and the "tin" Oracle database.
The development web interface is at dante-test.Dartmouth.EDU. At the
time of this writing, December 2008, development of the web interface
and the SQL schema is complete and frozen. Work on the project consists
of adding new commentaries and editing existing ones. For this reason
the only significant difference between the production and development
systems is that the latter contains some commentary texts that are in
the process of being loaded and edited.  When a complete commentary or
cantica is loaded and checked, we copy it to the production system. All
other types of files - HTML, SQL configuration, Makefiles, etc., are
essentially identical to the production system.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Here is a list of the files in this directory:

Editor's Style.* - A description of the DDP markup language. MS Word
and PDF format.

README - This file.

README.Conversions - A description of how to get newly-acquired commentary
text files into DDP markup language. This file describes the current
process where the bulk of the work is done on desktop computers. The
process draws on work done by Lars Lynch at a time when the conversion
was mostly done on the server.

README.Loading - A description of the organization of files on the web
server and the processes used to covert text formats and to load and
update text files into the SQL database.

README.RTF-Files - A detailed description written by Lars Lynch in 2002
describing the system he and John Wallace, both of Dartmouth Academic
Computing, arranged to translate RichText files (RTF) into the DDP mark-up
language. This detailed document describes the server-based process. As
such it is somewhat out of date, but still useful. Many of the files it
uses are now stored on this server in ~Dante/Alexandria-Archives/dante.

README.SQL - A description of the SQL schema of the database and the
utilities we use on the applications server to load and update text into
the SQL database.

README.Testing - A summary of how to test the DDP. This covers routine
testing to be sure nothing is broken and more thorough testing we might
do after a major software upgrade.
