..COMM:
Grandgent
..LANG:
English
..PUBD:
1909-13
..ATTR:
copyright
..LODD:
040428
\~ Date was Replaced
..DTYP:
I
..CTCA:
10-Inferno
..TEXT:
INTRODUCTION TO THE "DIVINE COMEDY"
..TEXT:
ACCORDING to the Ptolemaic system, which was accepted
from antiquity down to the time of Copernicus, the earth is a
solid motionless sphere in the centre of the universe.  Around
it
revolve nine transparent hollow spheres, each within its
outside
neighbor up to the ninth, the Primum Mobile; this imparts its
movement to the others and constitutes the frontier of the
material world.  The eighth heaven carries with it all the
fixed
stars.  Each of those below it contains one heavenly body: the
seventh, Saturn; the sixth, Jupiter; the fifth, Mars; the
fourth,
the Sun; the third, Venus; the second, Mercury; the first, the
Moon.  They all circle around the earth together, from east to
west, once in twenty-four hours.  But each heaven except the
ninth has, besides, an independent motion of its own, so that
it
is really moving in a compound curve, made up of two or more
different circular revolutions; for instance, the special
revolution of the moon is accomplished in a month; that of the
sun, in a year.  By these sets of motions, and an elaborate
system of computation by epicycles, the shifting positions of
the
sun, moon, and stars were accurately accounted for.  Outside
the
whole universe of matter is the spiritual Paradise, the
Empyrean,
the true abode of God, the angels, and the blest.  The earth
is
surrounded by air, and between this air and the heaven of the
moon is a sphere of fire, toward which all the fire on earth
is
striving to return.  All natural operations on earth are
controlled by the movements of the spheres, which are directed
by
nine orders of angels, or Heavenly Intelligences, created by
God
for this office.
..TEXT:
We have seen that two of the four elements, fire and air,
are between the moon and our globe; this body itself consists
of
the other two water and earth.  The four are arranged in the
order of their lightness and their purity.  Dante believed the
earth to be perfectly spherical and about 20,000 miles in
circumference.  The continents are all grouped on one side,
the
Hemisphere of Land which contains not only Europe, Asia,
Africa,
and some islands, but also the Mediterranean and a part of the
great ocean; at the exact centre of this hemisphere is
Jerusalem.
On the other side is the Hemisphere of Water, in which is no
land, except (according to Dante's idea) the mountainous
Island
of Purgatory, situated precisely opposite Jerusalem.  At the
top
of the mountain of Purgatory is the Garden of Eden.  The
greater
part of the land on the earth's surface is north of the
equator,
the greater part of the water is south; but the Hemispheres of
Land and Water by no means coincide with the northern and
southern hemispheres.  At the eastern extremity of the
Hemisphere
of Land is the River Ganges, at the western edge are the
Straits
of Gibraltar.  The Mediterranean was thought to extend over
900,
or a quarter of the earth's circumference; Italy, midway
between
Gibraltar and Jerusalem, is therefore 450, or three hours,
from
each.
..TEXT:
Hell is a vast cavity in the form of an inverted cone,
whose apex is at the centre of the earth and whose circular
base
lies beneath the Hemisphere of Land, from which it is shut off
by
a crust; it extends, apparently, from Italy to mid-Asia.  The
round declivity of the cavern is broken into nine steps, each
of
which runs all the way around it; they are of unequal width
and
separated by cliffs of varying height and steepness.  Two
enormous precipices divide it roughly into three horizontal
sections.  A huge wall, circling around one of the terraces,
severs the outermost section from the other two, making an
Upper
and a Lower Hell; the latter is called the City of Dis.  On
each
of the steps is punished some particular kind of sin: in the
Upper Hell, the sins of Incontinence, due to lack of
self-control;
in the Lower Hell, the sins of Violence and Fraud, due
respectively to Bestiality (or rather ^bestilialis malitia~)
and Malace or ^malitia humana~).  Violence occupies the middle
section Fraud the lowest.  Four steps, or circles, are devoted
to the four kinds of Incontinence -- lust, gluttony, avarice
(and
prodigality) anger.  One circle suffices for Bestiality, but
it
is divided into three parts, according to the object of the
violence: that object may be one's neighbor, one's self, or
God.
Malice occupies two circles: in the first are the fraudulent,
those who deceived persons not bound to them by any special
ties;
in the second are the traitors, destroyers of their kinsfolk,
their countrymen, their guests, or their benefactors.  This
last
circle forms the very floor of Hell; it is a lake of ice at
the
bottom of a pit; embedded in the middle, at the centre of the
earth, is Satan, in whose three mouths are the three
arch-traitors,
Judas, Brutus, and Cassius.  Outside of this general
scheme, but within Hell, are three regions inhabited
respectively
by the souls of sluggards and time-servers, those who were
neither good nor bad; the souls of unbaptized children and
virtuous pagans; and the souls of heretics.  All three are
circles, like those mentioned.  The first, sometimes called
the
^Antinferno~, is a vestibule, just inside the entrance, but
outside the River Acheron.  The second, the Limbus, is within
the
encircling Acheron, at a lower level than the Vestibule, and
forms the first of the nine steps.  The third, which
constitutes
the sixth circle, lies close within the walls of the City of
Dis,
but is separated from the rest of the Lower Hell by a mighty
precipice.  The souls in the nether world are, then, arranged
in
this order: sluggish; ^unbaptized~; lustful, gluttonous,
avaricious (and prodigal), wrathful; ^heretical~; violent;
fraudulent, treacherous.  The sluggish, the unbaptized, and
the
heretical lie outside the three great classes -- Incontinence,
Violence, Fraud.  The sluggish are in the Vestibule; all the
others are in the nine circles.  The punishments vary
according
to the sins, each being a retaliation for the offence.  It
must
not be forgotten, however, that allegorically the torments
represent the sins themselves. 'Wherewith a man sinneth, by
the
same also shall he be punished '(Wisdom xi, 16).  Dante, under
the guidance of Reason, ransacks the human heart and learns to
know wickedness as it really is, stripped of the false
semblance
of good.  Thus, for instance, the furious blast that eternally
wafts the carnal sinners symbolizes irresistible passion; the
ice
in which traitors are buried is the coldness of the heart from
which all love has been expelled.
..TEXT:
In Dante's Purgatory the sinners are arranged as follows:
lustful, gluttonous, avaricious (and prodigal), slothful,
wrathful, envious, proud.  Sloth intevenes between avarice and
anger; envy and pride correspond to the violence, deceit, and
treachery of Hell; there is no place for paganism or heresy.
The
difference is a natural one.  Hell is the eternal abode of
those
who die unrepentant; Purgatory is a place of passage for those
who, whatever their crimes may have been, die penitent within
the
Church.  In Purgatory we have to do only with man's
fundamental
evil dispositions, of which the soul is to be cleansed; in
Hell
souls are tortured for specific acts or states of the will,
the
multifarious fruit of these dispositions.  The seven capital
vices had long been defined by Church writers, and their
order,
in the main, was pretty well established; the relative
positions
of sloth and wrath were the most doubtful.  In the ^Moralia~
of
Gregory the Great (XXXI, Cap. 45) and in one passage in St.
Thomas (^De Malo~, VIII, i) they are all arranged as in Dante,
but St. Thomas has them in three other orders, and apparently
regards their sequence as unimportant; he prefers ^inanis
gloria~
to ^superbia~ as a designation of Pride.  All the sins in the
Lower Hell are directed against justice, and are due to some
kind
of malice, originally caused, perhaps, by Envy and Pride.
Pride,
indeed, is the foundation of all sin, inasmuch as sin consists
in
defying God's law; this doctrine is laid down by St. Cyprian,
and
recurs in Gregory and St. Thomas.  Sloth, or lukewarmness in
love
of the Lord and his creatures, corresponds to the
philosophical
^ignavia~ and ^pusillaninimitas~; in so far as it belongs in
the
nether world at all, it has its proper place in the Vestibule.
The unbaptized are beyond redemption, and therefore Purgatory
is
denied them.  Heresy belongs to the speculative intellect, not
to
the lower appetite nor to the will; it is neither incontinence
nor malice and therefore has no manifestly appropriate place
in
Dante's system, nor in St. Thomas's.  What becomes of
repentant
heretics we are not told, but we may assume that their penance
must be paid in the circle of pride.
..TEXT:
The mystic journey occurs in 1300, the year of the great
Papal jubilee proclamed by Boniface VIII.  It was a time of
general religious enthusiasm, an appropriate moment for a
moral
awakening.  The date is given vaguely in the opening line of
the
poem definitely in ^Inf.~ XXI, 112-4.  This latter passage
tells
us also that the descent was begun on the anniversary of the
crucifixion.  This may mean March 25, the real date, or Good
Friday, the movable Church anniversary.  Good Friday in 1300
fell
on April 8, and several references in the poem seem to fit
that
day better than March 25.  ^Inf.~ XX, 127 and ^Purg.~ XXIII,
119
inform us that the moon was full the night before; in reality
the
full moon occurred in 1300 on April 5, but in the
ecclesiastical
calendar for that year the Paschal full moon was set down for
the
night of April 7.  ^Purg.~ I, 1920 represents Venus as the
morning star two days later; this was the case in 1301, not in
1300, but here again it was surely the almanac that led Dante
astray.  There is a peculiar fitness in starting on the
downward
journey on the evening of Good Friday, when day and hour are
conducive to gloom.  The ascent of Purgatory, on the other
hand,
begins at a time when everything suggests hope, the morning of
Easter Sunday.  Throughout the poem we are apparently to think
of
sunrise and sunset as occurring at six o'clock.  It is, then,
on
the night of April 7, 1300, that Dante comes to his senses in
the
dark wood of sin.  The next day he spends in trying to
struggle
out, directing his steps toward the sunlit mountain of
righteousness; but three beasts -- his evil habits -- impede
his
progress.  When all seems lost, Virgil, or Reason, appears and
offers to lead him out by another way.  They enter Hell at
sunset
on April 8, and spend the night and the next day in their
spiral
course, turning always to the left as they descend.  In Hell
they
go by the time of Jerusalem, which is directly over the bottom
of
the pit.  When they reach the centre of the earth, they pass
beyond, climbing along the shaggy side of Satan, who is
planted
there; then, of course, they are under the opposite
hemisphere,
whose middle point is Purgatory, between which and Jerusalem
there is a difference of twelve hours.  Dante represents
Virgil
and himself, therefore, as gaining twelve hours when they pass
the earth's centre: they have a new Saturday before them, and
they use all that and the following night in climbing out, by
a
dark, difficult cavern, to the other side of the earth, where
they emerge on the Island of Purgatory on Sunday morning.
Dante
has turned his back on sin, has laboriously weaned himself
from
it, and is now ready to cleanse his soul by penance.
..TEXT:
Virgil evidently represents Reason, human understanding,
as opposed to Revelation, heavenly intelligence, embodied in
Beatrice.  One may ask why he was chosen for this function,
rather than Aristotle, 'il filosofo,' 'maestro di color che
sanno.'  For many centuries the ^Aeneid~ had been the best of
school-books, the one from which pupils learned grammar,
rhetoric, history, mythology.  It was expounded literally and
allegorically.  Its author, at least until Aristotle was
discovered in the 12th century, was universally regarded as
the
wisest man of antiquity, the personification of the best that
humanity, without superhuman enlightenment, could achieve; and
even in 1300 his fame was scarcely dimmed by the greater glory
of
the Greek philosopher.  Moreover, he had already proved, in
the
sixth book of the ^Aeneid~, his competence as a guide to the
other world.  People generally believed, too, that in his
fourth
Eclogue he had unconsciously prophesied the coming of Christ.
Furthermore, Aristotle was to Dante only a book, while Virgil
had
been so long a figure in popular and scholarly legend that he
had
become a distinct personality, one with whom it was a joy to
travel and from whom it was anguish to part.  Dante thought of
himself as in reality a disciple and successor of Virgil.  The
Mantuan was the bard of Imperial Rome, its beginnings in
history
and its future greatness as ruler of the world.  The
Florentine
was the prophet of the second advent of Rome, now seat of both
temporal and spiritual authority.  The ^Commedia~ is, then, as
it
were, a second ^Aeneid.~  Lastly, Dante felt for the master of
his childhood, his model in later years, a warm personal
gratitude that he was eager to express:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Tu se' lo mio maestro e 'l mio autore;
     Tu se' solo colui da cu' io tolsi
     Lo bello stilo che m'ha fatto onore.'
..TEXT:
In the ^Image du Monde~, of the first half of the 13th
century, St.
Paul says of Virgil:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Ha! quel je t'eusse rendu
     A Dieu, se tu fusses vivant!'
..TEXT:
One may compare a canticle, sung at the office of St. Paul in
Mantua, apparently as late as the 15th century:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Ad Maronis mausoleum
     Ductus, fudit super eum
     Pie rorem lacryme.
     "Quam te," inquit, "reddidissem,
     si te vivum invenissem,
     Poetarum maxime!"
..TEXT:
N. B. -- Whenever Dante's minor works are cited, the
references are to the Oxford Dante, ^Tutte le opere di Dante
Alighieri~, edited by Dr. E. Moore, 3d ed., 1904.
..TEXT:
References to the Bible are printed in lower case Roman
type.
..TEXT:
1. THE FLORENCE in which Dante lived was virtually an
independent municipality controlled by trades' unions.
Intense
local pride, multifarious energy and enterprise, zest for
politics, and partisan rivalry kept the blood of her citizens
hot.  The town was rapidly coming to the front rank among
European cities; in manufactures and commerce she was a
leader;
inrushing wealth and increasing magnificence made her a
pleasant
abode.  And all these interests -- self-government, business,
luxurious living -- had the charm of novelty.  So it was with
painting, which was undergoing transformation at the hands of
Giotto, the successor of Cimabue; so with sculpture and
architecture; so with literature in the vulgar tongue, first
introduced into Tuscany in the generation preceding Dante.
Yet
all these innovations were developing, not in a traditionless
new
settlement, but in a very ancient community, the home of
countless generations of civilization.  This, no doubt, is the
reason why all her creative activities, material and
intellectual, naturally assumed an artistic form in which
delicacy and sobriety are allied to a dominant sense of
harmony.
It was a fit place for the breeding of genius: the swiftly
growing town was big enough to afford a field for all kinds of
talent, and yet so little that all were neighbors and merit
could
scarcely go unrecognized.  The public offices, too, were
numerous
and the terms of service short, so that many citizens had a
direct share in the management of affairs.  On the other hand,
the community was rent by party strife.  The middle class,
with
its accumulating wealth and strength, was hated by the old
military aristocracy, largely of Germanic origin, which lurked
entrenched in castles within and without the city, surrounded
by
armed retainers, ready to seize upon any pretext to make
trouble
and the burghers were bent on reducing the feudal lords to
political impotence.  The old quarrel between Guelfs and
Ghibellines had ceased with the defeat of the latter party at
Benevento in 1266, but new factions, as irreconcilable as the
old, carried on the internal war.  The Whites, under the
leadership of the Cerchi family, represented the new power of
industry and money; the Donati, with their Blacks, stood for
the
old nobility, with which the unaffiliated lowest class was
inclined to side.  In 1300 the most active leaders of both
parties were sentenced to banishment.  The Blacks,
unsuccessful
at home, sought aid abroad.  Pope Boniface VIII, who had an
old
claim on Tuscany, sent to the city that royal adventurer,
Charles
of Valois, ostensibly as a peacemaker.  He entered Florence
with
an army, and straightway turned it over to the Blacks.  The
Whites were driven out, among them Dante, who never returned.
This was in 1302.
..TEXT:
2. In such a community Dante was born in 1265, probably
in the last days of May.  We know little of his career.  His
works afford some bits of information, and there are a few
scraps
of documentary evidence; his neighbor, Giovanni Villani,
inserted
a brief sketch of him in his Chronicle; Boccaccio prepared a
short, eulogistic account of him after his death, and his life
was written in the next century by Leonardo Bruni.  These are
our
principal sources.  The mass of legend that has grown up about
him makes the truth all the more difficult to ascertain.  He
came
of a family ennobled several generations back, but neither
rich
nor particularly conspicuous.  Their name was originally
^Alagherius~, or ^Alaghieri.~  His own name, ^Dante~, is a
shortened form of ^Durante.~  His mother died during his
childhood, and his father, after marrying again, died in 1283.
A
half-brother, Francesco, and a half-sister, Tana, were the
fruit
of this new marriage.  Concerning another sister we do not
know
whether she was the child of the first wife or the second.  As
far as we can judge from the ^Commedia~, the lad's early
impressions of family life were happy.  He doubtless received
a
careful education; it is likely enough that, after learning
the
rudiments from the Dominicans, he attended the Franciscan
school
of Santa Croce.  Close familiarity with country as well as
city
life is shown in his writings.  His imagination was cultivated
by
much reading of Proven$cal and Italian poets, from whom he
learned unaided the science of metrics.  He was deeply
influenced, too, by contemporary art, and himself practised
drawing.  Early he distinguished himself as a poet, in a town
where poetry and music were just acquiring an unprecedented
vogue; and through his verse he made valuable acquaintances.
His 'first friend' was the famous poet Guido, considerably his
senior and his literary adviser, of the rich Cavalcanti
family.
Brunetto Latini, a great scholar, secretary of the Republic.
aided him with counsel.  Other poets, the notary Lapo Gianni
and
later the youthful Cino da Pistoia, and also the musician
Casella, were his associates.  A comrade of less desirable
character was Forese Dunati, brother of Corso, the leader of
the
Blacks; Forese, a high liver of shady reputation, exchanged
with
Dante a series of scurrilous sonnets.  Dante mingled in the
pastimes of his city and did not hold aloof from more serious
civic matters: in 1289 he took part in an important military
campaign, probably not his first.  He may have been in Bologna
in
1287 or thereabouts; he must have visited Lombardy before
1300.
Between 1293 and 1300 he got deeply into debt.  At some time
probably before 1297 he married Gemma Donati, a fourth cousin
of
Corso and Forese, to whom he had probably been affianced since
boyhood (the dowry having been fixed in 1277); she bore him
two
sons, Pietro and Jacopo, and, in all likelihood, two
daughters.  The family did not follow him in his exile,
although three of the children later joined him in Ravenna.
Gemma remained in Florence, where she was still alive in 1332.
In 1295 Dante entered public life, and a few years later
became
an important figure in local politics.  He strove for the
independence of Florence, and repeatedly opposed the projects
of
the Pope.  After going on a successful embassy to San
Gimignano,
he was for two months, in the summer of 1300, one of the six
Priors of Florence.  In 1301 he was commissioned to supervise
the
widening and improvement of a street.  At the critical moment
of the advent of Charles of Valois, or shortly before, Dante
is
said, on good authority, to have been absent on a mission to
Rome.  On trumped-up charges he was condemned, first to fine
and
exclusion, later to death by fire; subsequently, perhaps in
1315,
he refused to purchase pardon by submission.  For a little
while after his banishment, in 1302, he conspired with his
fellow-exiles; then, disgusted with their policy, perhaps in
danger of his life from their violence, he turned his back on
them and formed 'a party by himself.  'The story of his
wanderings
is fragmentary.  His first refuge was with the Scala family in
Verona.  On the death of his generous patron, Bartolommeo or
Alboino, in 1304, he is supposed to have visited the
university
at Bologna, where he was known by 1287.  There is reason to
believe that he traveled widely in Italy, especially in the
North.  He appears to have been in Padua in 1306.  In the same
year he was in Lunigiana with the Malaspina, for whom, on
October
6, he acted as attorney in concluding a peace with the bishop
of
Luni.  Thence he probably went to the mountains of the
Casentino,
on the upper Arno; and it is believed, on the authority of
Boccaccio and Villani, that he journeyed between 1307 and 1309
to
Paris.  In 1308 Henry of Luxembourg, a noble idealist, was
elected Emperor; crowned the next year at Aix as Henry VII, he
descended in 1310 into Italy, to reunite Church and State,
restore order, and reduce rebellious cities to submission.
His
coming aroused wild excitement and conflicting passions.
Florence from the first offered sturdy and successful
opposition.
Dante, who firmly believed that the woes of Florence and all
Italy -- in fact, most of the evils in the world -- were due
to
lack of Imperial guidance, greeted Henry as a saviour and
hastened to pay him homage.  Three letters written in 1310 and
1311 show him in a state of feverish exaltation.  He was
probably
in Pisa in 1312.  Henry's invasion, however, was fruitless: he
was involved in a turmoil of party strife; the Pope who had
summoned him turned against him; and just as his prospects
were
brightening he died ingloriously near Siena in 1313.  With him
perished Dante's immediate hopes of peace, the regeneration of
his country, and his own restoration.  Possibly he took refuge
with the Imperial champion Can Grande della Scala in Verona in
1314.  If, as we may infer from a passage in the ^Commedia~
Dante
went to Lucca, this visit may well have occurred shortly after
Henry's death, possibly in 1315; in that year or the next he
doubtless returned to Verona.  Later, we do not know when, the
poet, already famous through his lyrics, his ^Convivio~,
^Inferno~,
and ^Purgatorio~ was offered an asylum in Ravenna by Guido
Novello da Polenta, a nephew of Francesca da Rimini.  His
daughter Beatrice was a nun in that city; his son Pietro held
a
benefice there.  This was his home until his death on
September
13 or 14, 1321.  Shortly before the end he was sent on a
mission to Venice.  His last years seem to have been peaceful
and
happy.  In Ravenna, where he was greatly esteemed, he had
congenial society and eager pupils.  He maintained friendly
relations with Can Grande della Scala, captain of the
Ghibelline
league, on whom he built great hopes.  Though Florence still
repudiated him, Bologna desired his presence.
..TEXT:
3.  The foregoing biography of Dante omits the most
significant feature of his life, the love for Beatrice.  The
chivalric amorous service of ladies, which had sprung up among
the poets of southern France, developed with some of the later
troubadours, under the influence of the growing cult of Mary
in
the 13th century, into an idealization of woman and a
spiritual
devotion.  But it remained for the school of Bologna and its
Florentine disciples to transform this sentiment into a
transcendental passion, a combination of religious mysticism
and
instinctive desire with the Averroistic doctrine of a passive
individual soul and an active oversoul.  In the verse of Guido
Guinizelli, who lived just before Dante, woman becomes the
visible symbol of the angelic nature; the lover worships in
his
lady the Heavenly Intelligence which reveals itself in her;
only
the noble heart is capable of love, and without a fitting
object
to arouse its inborn love to activity even such a heart is
powerless to manifest its latent goodness.  These ideas are
set
forth in a beautiful ^canzone~ beginning 'Al cor gentil ripara
sempre amore' to which Dante continually reverts.  Guinizelli
he
calls his master, and master of all those who write sweet
rimes
of love.  Dante dreamer that he was, and profoundly religious,
naturally fell under the sway of this teaching.  Critics have
hotly debated the question whether his Beatrice was a real
woman.
Boccaccio asserts that she was Beatrice Portinari, daughter of
Folco Portinari, a wealthy and public-spirited Florentine who
died in 1289; before that date she was married to a rich
banker
of good family, Simone dei Bardi.  There is no valid ground
for
rejecting this statement.  But after all it makes little
difference who she was: the living woman merely furnished the
impression that aroused the poet's creative fancy.  All
imaginative lovers idealize their mistresses beyond
recognition.
The Beatrice that Dante presents to us, real as she was to
him,
is almost wholly the product of his own mind.  With the
flesh-and-blood Beatrice he seems to have had little more than
a bowing
acquaintance, and there is no reason to believe that she
returned
or even understood his affection.  He first met her when he
was
nine and she was eight, and even then -- at least so it seemed
when he looked back upon the episode -- she appeared to him as
a
revelation of the heavenly.  Nine years later they exchanged a
greeting.  When, led to think ill of him by his excessive
attentions to another lady, she refused to recognize him, he
was
profoundly hurt; and his pain was redoubled on one occasion
when,
with other ladies, she laughed at his show of emotion.  He
grieved with her sorrow at the loss of a friend. and again
when
her father was taken from her; he was tormented by a
foreboding
of her death.  Stirred by feminine criticism, he determined to
exclude supplication from his verse and make all his
love-poetry
a hymn of praise.  So much he tells us, in the ^Vita Nuova~,
of
his relations with the living Beatrice.  After her death, in
1290, her image seems to have become clearer and more fixed;
but
her influence could not preserve him from morbid dejection and
unworthy pursuits.  Book-learning and worldliness engrossed
him
for a while, in spite of the recurring prick of conscience.
Even
in early youth his fancy had strayed to other women, and his
comradeship with the disreputable Forese Donati is perhaps to
be
ascribed to a boyish period.  After the passing of Beatrice he
was, as he thought, unduly moved by the pity of an unnamed
lady,
who soon, however, became in his mind a mere visible picture
of
the object of his great passion, Philosophy.  At some time,
perhaps later, in the Casentino, he apparently became
violently
enamored of a young woman to whom he addressed the most wildly
beautiful lyrics in all amatory literature; but even these
poems
are not beyond the suspicion of allegorical intent.
..TEXT:
4. When we ask ourselves why we are so strangely stirred
by the words of a man of whom we know so little, one so remote
in
date and in thought, we find that it is because, on the one
hand,
he knew how to present universal emotions, stripping his
experiences of all that is peculiar to time or place; and,
secondly, because he felt more intensely than other men: his
joy,
his anguish, his love, his hate, his hope, his faith, were so
keen that they come quivering down through the ages and set
our
hearts in responsive vibration.  This intensity seems to
distinguish him from other poets of the Middle Ages, perhaps,
in part, because he alone had the art to express it.  See V.
Cian, ^I
contatti letterari italo-provenzali e la prima rivoluzione
poetica della letteratura italiana~, 1900; K. Vossler, ^Die
philosophischen Grundlagen zum "s,ussen neuen Stil"~, 1904; L.
Azzolina, ^Il "dolce stil nuovo"~, 1903; P. Savj Lopez,
^Trovatori
e Poeti~, 1906, pp. 9 ff.; Moore, II, 79; E. V. Zappia, ^Studi
sulla Vita Nuova di Dante.  Della questione di Beatrice~,
1904;
I. Del Lungo, ^Beatrice nella vita e nella Poesia del secolo
XIII~, 1891; G. Carducci, ^Delle rime di Dante~, in his ^Studi
letterari~, VIII, 1 ff.; A. Zenatti, ^Le rime di Dante per la
Pargoletta~, in the ^Rivista d'Italia~, Jan. 15, 1899; V.
Imbriani, ^Sulle canzoni pietrose di Dante~, in his ^Studi
danteschi~, 1891, pp. 427 ff.; A. Abbruzzese, ^Su le "Rime
Pietrose" di Dante~, in the ^Giorn. dant.~, XI, 97 ff.; A.
Santi,
^Il Canzoniere di Dante~, vol. II, 1906 (vol. I has not
appeared); M. Barbi, ^Studi sul canzoniere di Dante~, 1915;
R$emy de Gourmont, ^Dante, Beatrice et la po$esie amoureuse,
essai sur l'id$eal f$eminin en Italie @a la fin du XIII@eme
siecle~, 1908; L. Valli, ^Il Linguaggio segreto di Dante e dei
"Fedeli d' amore"~, 1928; C. H. Grandgent, ^The Ladies of
Dante's
Lyrics~, 1917.  His mastery of language far
transcends that of any other medieval poet, and surpasses that
of
all but the few very foremost in the world's history.  In his
close observation and apparent enjoyment of the varying, even
the
sternest aspects of nature, he seems nearer to our generation
than to his own.  His study of human nature is no less close.
Though the title ^Commedia~ contained, in its author's mind,
no
suggestion of the stage, the poem exhibits a command of
dramatic
situation, a skill in characterization by means of dialogue,
not
to be found in any playwright between Euripides and
Shakespeare.
One other gift he possessed that belongs to no period, but is
bestowed upon the greatest artists of all times -- the power
of
visualization, the ability to see distinctly in his mind's eye
and to place before the mental vision of the reader not only
such
things as men have seen, but also the creations of a grandiose
imagination, and even bodiless abstractions.  In most other
respects he belonged to his age: in his submission to
authority
in all matters of science and philosophy, his unquestioning
acceptance of Christian dogma; in his subordination of beauty
to
truth and his relegation of it to the position of handmaid to
utility; in his conception of the individual, not as an
independent unit, but as a part of humanity, and his
consequent
desire to suppress all reference to the events and
characteristics that differentiate himself from other men.
Mediaeval, too, was his mysticism: in him we see a man with
the
most acute perception of reality, the most eager interest in
the
doings of his fellows, yet imbued with the idea that the world
of
fact is all a shadowy image of the world of spirit; his feet
were
firmly planted on earth, while his head was in the clouds.
..TEXT:
5.  Visionary as he was, saddened by his own misfortunes,
and exasperated by human wickedness, he had a fundamentally
healthy disposition.  In his character fierce passion was
mated
with equally vigorous self-control; vehemence was balanced by
introspection and self-judgment; imagination was yoked with
logic.  He admired simplicity, even asceticism, but he was far
from being a foe to culture or to the usages of polite
society.
He was fond of courtly pursuits, and erudite even to pedantry.
In the great writings of pagan times he found a source of
endless
delight, and he did not hesitate to put them on a par with his
Christian authorities.  His admiration was less excited by
Christian martyrs than by heroic pagan suicides.  His Christ
is
always sublime, a part of the triune God, never the meek lamb
nor
the humble preacher of Galilee.  His outlook upon life was
persistently hopeful.  Bad as the world was, there could be no
doubt of ultimate reform.  The Lord, in his unfathomable
wisdom,
might allow evil to triumph for a while, but his kingdom was
sure
to come.  Dante's political views were entirely abstract and
theoretical, and reactionary even for his own day.  He had
always
before him the general principle rather than the particular
case.
Man being naturally a social creature, political organization
is
necessary, both in order to supply the manifold needs of the
community, assigning different functions to different members,
and in order to check greed and insure justice and peace, so
that
every citizen may have an opportunity to attain his highest
development.  The State, then, is as necessary -- though not
so
venerable -- as the Church.  God ordained both, and decreed
that
Caesar should found the one, Christ the other.  Empire and
Papacy are co,ordinate powers, neither subservient to the
other,
but both responsible directly to God.  The goodness and
happiness
of the world depend on the balance of the temporal and the
spiritual authorities.  The rapacity of the clergy and the
negligence of sovereigns have disturbed this equilibrium by
transferring to the Papacy what belongs to the Empire.
Mankind
cannot thrive until the adjustment is restored.  In his
treatment
of civics, and in the importance given to avarice as a
disturber
of society, Dante follows Aristotle (^Ethics~, V), whom he
first
knew through the commentary of St. Thomas.  From the same
master he derived vast stores of physical information, as well
as
a philosophical method and terminology.  His general
classification of sins and his definition of moral virtues are
Aristotelian, but his essential conception of sin and virtue
is
quite different, being thoroughly Christian.  One can only
guess
what Dante would have been had he really known Plato, to whom
he
was temperamentally so much more akin.  On the ethical side
Dante
was an eclectic, as were his ancient masters, Cicero and
Boethius; Senecan stoicism and Franciscan mysticism dwelt in
him
side by side.  St. Thomas, the interpreter of Aristotle, the
learned and ingenious expounder of moral philosophy and
Christian
dogma, furnished Dante with an abundance of religious doctrine
and a host of subtle observations and arguments (not always
devoid of inconsistency), and reinforced his inborn fondness
for
intricate reasoning.  To St. Thomas's teacher, Albertus
Magnus,
the 'Universal Doctor,' perhaps the greatest scholar and
philosopher of the Middle Ages, Dante was directly indebted
for
not a few of his physical and ethical ideas.  Like St.
Augustine,
Dante takes as his starting-point the Pauline doctrine of
predestination and grace; but he draws from it very different
consequences.  In Dante, as in St. Paul, love is supreme.  It
is
the moving force of the universe and of God himself.  Through
love God was impelled to create, that there might be others to
share his happiness.  Everything created is filled with love
of
the Creator.  Animals, plants, lifeless things express their
love
by being what he made them: the stone, bv its hardness and its
magic power; the star, by its light and its influence upon
earth;
the beast, by following its instinct.  They cannot do wrong,
having no choice.  It was God's purpose, however, that there
should be creatures with an individual consciousness, a real
life
of their own; this could not be without freedom of the will,
and
such freedom implies the possibility of sin.  Angels and men
alone were given ability to sin, because they alone were
created
free.  But almost instantly after their creation the angels
were
endowed with such overwhelming grace of vision that their will
was identical with that of their Maker.  The revolt of Lucifer
and his fellows occurred in the moment between creation and
the
acceptance of this grace.  The power of vision bestowed on the
Heavenly Intelligences is not the same for all: no two angels
see
God alike, and consequently their natures and functions are
diverse, though entirely good.  So it is with men.  God, in
his
grace, gives to different men, as he shapes their souls,
different degrees of vision.  On this vision all their
knowledge
and all their love depend.  According to its clearness, the
love
of God is more or less intense, wisdom is greater or less, the
choice of good and evil is easier or harder, and the eternal
state of the soul, if Heaven be attained, is a higher or lower
degree of blessedness.  Every soul has sight enough to win
salvation, and is therefore fully responsible; but some are
capable of greater beatitude than others.  Predestination
becomes, then, in Dante, a mysterious manifestation of God's
love: he loves all men, but he fashions them for different
ends,
on earth and in Heaven, and his love for all is not identical.
The natural instinct of man is to return to his Creator and to
love all that is like him.  But through inexperience and lack
of
guidance he may at first mistake evil for good.  He possesses,
however, the grace of vision, which enables him to
discriminate;
if he persists in wrongdoing, he rejects grace and sins.  If
he
dies unrepentant, he loses grace forever; if he repents before
death, he retains grace and innocence by discipline.  Had
mankind
from the beginning made the proper use of the free will, there
would have been no death; all human beings would have lived
happily on earth until the Judgment Day, and would then have
been
taken up to Heaven in the flesh.  Adam's disobedience brought
death and sin into the world, and suspended salvation until
atonement was made by Christ.  Only by faith in Christ, before
or
after his coming, can man be saved; but this faith is
(theoretically, at least) within the reach of all.  We have
seen
that man's path is made unduly hard by the lack of temporal
direction, for which the impotence of the State is to blame.
Men's talents and dispositions differ, too, being the product
of
the stars -- governed by Heavenly Intelligences -- that
presided
over their birth; but every human creature has power to
overcome
his natural defects so far as to make himself worthy of
Heaven.
The origin of imperfection in the universe is a difficult (not
to
say insuluble) problem -- one to which Dante often reverted,
without ever finding a satisfactory answer.  His main argument
is
that whatsoever is directly shaped by God is perfect what is
fashioned by nature (that is, by the influence of the stars)
is
faulty.  God created brute matter, the heavens, the angels and
creates human souls as they are born.  All the rest is the
work
of nature.  Why nature, itself the work of God, should operate
defectively, we are not told.  Elsewhere Dante says that God,
in
making material things, has to work with matter, which being
imperfect, the divine plan is not realized; but inasmuch as
God
created matter, this statement can be reconciled with the
other
only by the supposition that Dante here means, not brute
matter,
but matter already differentiated and compounded by nature.
His
whole explanation reduces itself to this: the angels, having
an
incomplete vision of the divine mind, cannot execute its
intent
so well as God himself.  If we ask why -- this being the case
--
the angels were given this ministry, or, having the charge,
were
not endowed with complete sight, no reply is offered.  The
theory
that evil was introduced into the world that man might have
exercise for his free will is not formulated in the ^Divine
Comedy.~
..TEXT:
6.  Outside of the ^Divine Comedy~, Dante's ideas are to
be found, first of all, in the ^Convivio~, an unfinished
encyclopedic work, in Italian, in the form of a discursive
prose
commentary on fourteen of the author's ^canzoni~; of the
projected fifteen books, only four were written, and only
three
^canzoni~ are included.  The logically constructed, but purely
idealistic and theoretical ^Monarchia~, a Latin treatise in
three
books, contains his political views.  Another Latin treatise,
the
uncompleted ^De Vulgari Eloquentia~, gives us his opinions on
language in general, the use of the modern idiom as a literary
medium, the relative merits of the various Italian dialects,
and
the principles of poetic composition in the vulgar tongue; he
believed that an ideal, universal Italian, different from any
of
the actually spoken dialects, was fit, not onlv for amatory
verse, but for martial and moral themes as well.  A third
Latin
work ascribed to him, the ^De Aqua et Terra~, is a
controversial
lecture delivered in Verona in 1320, debating technically the
question whether the water of the sea rises in any part higher
than the land.  Some fourteen Latin letters, written at
different
periods, are attributed to him in manuscripts, and there is
record of others, now lost; the authenticity of all the
fourteen
has been doubted, but it is probable that at least ten are
his.
Of a political character are the epistles to the princes and
peoples of Italy, to the Emperor, to the Florentines, to the
Italian cardinals, to a Florentine friend, and an early one to
Niccol@o da Prato.  The most important from a literary
standpoint, if he really wrote it, is the later, ponderously
exegetical ^Epistola ad Canem Grandem~, accompanying the first
canto of the ^Paradiso~ with a minute comment on its opening
lines and a general discussion of allegory.  Many letters and
many poems have doubtless perished.  On the other hand, some
pieces of verse that have gone under his name are, in all
likelihood, not his.  There seems to be no sufficient reason
to
ascribe to him the long sonnet sequence called ^Il Fiore~, an
abridged paraphrase of the ^Roman de la Rose.~  Among the
miscellaneous poems, not contained in his longer works, that
are
attached to him, we may reckon as his a dozen ^canzoni~, a
half
dozen or more ^ballate~, two ^sestine~, and some twenty-five
or
thirty sonnets; they were composed at various times, and treat
of
love, philosophy, ethics, and sundry occasional topics.  Some
of
them are similar in tone to those comprised in the ^Convivio~,
others are in the same vein as the thirty-one (mostly sonnets)
that form the skeleton of the ^Vita Nuova.~  This 'little
book'
consists of a carefully selected and artistically arranged
series
of amatory poems, surrounded by a dainty prose commentary
telling
of the poet's early love for Beatrice.  There is reason to
believe that the prose was written in 1292.  Now the final
chapter of the ^Vita Nuova~ speaks of a wondrous vision which
determined the lover to write no more of his lady until he
should
be worthier of the theme; to prepare himself, he was studying
with might and main, and he hoped, if his life were spared a
few
years, to say of her what never had been said of woman.  This
study, begun for comfort's sake in the darkest hour of
mourning
for his dead love, as he declares in the ^Convivio~ soon
became
an object in itself, and aroused a new passion that threatened
to
quench the memory of the old.  Beginning with Cicero's ^De
Amicitia~ and the ^Consolatio Philosophiae~ of Boethius, he
plunged deep into philosophy and theology.  Of the vast
knowledge
thus accumulated the scholar was naturally proud, and he
planned
to set it before his fellow-men in the ^Convivio~, which was
to
be a guide to others and a defence of himself.  This treatise
doubtless occupied him between 1305 and 1308.  Only when vast
hopes were awakened and then temporarily blighted by the
advent
and death of his Imperial hero, did Dante forsake this
project;
then, leaving it two thirds unrealized -- leaving unfinished,
too, it would seem, his ^De Vulgari Eloquentia~, -- he
returned
to the fulfilment of his earlier purpose, which, in all
probability, he had never quite abandoned.  Conceived, then,
it
appears, as early as 1292, the plan of the ^Divina Commedia~
was
probably not fully matured until after the death of Henry VII,
the Emperor whose advent in 1310 had aroused such wild
expectations in Dante's breast.  As Henry died in 1313 and the
poet in 1321, we may ascribe the composition of the work, in
the
main, to the years that lie between these dates.  Some
critics,
however, put the ^Inferno~ much earlier.  Both the ^Inferno~
and
the ^Purgatorio~ were made public, either singly or together,
considerably before the ^Paradiso.~  If report is to be
trusted,
this last ^cantica~ busied the author until the very end of
his
life.  Yet he found time, in his last years, to write two
graceful Latin eclogues and (if they be his) the letter to Can
Grande and the ^Quaestio de Aqua et Terra.~  There is no
external and no definite internal evidence to fix the date of
the
^Monarchia~; its general style and maturity point to the
latest
possible period.
..TEXT:
7.  In making his preparation, what books had he studied?
The ^Aeneid~, that corner-stone of medieval education, must
have confronted him from childhood; he tells us that he knew
it
all by heart.  There is no proof, however, that he read the
^Georgics~, or any of the ^Eclogues~ except the fourth.  The
Latin Bible he had at his fingers' ends.  Cicero's ethical
writings -- especially ^De Amicitia~ and ^De Officiis~ -- and
the great work of Boethius introduced him to philosophy.  Much
of
Aristotle (but not the ^Poetics~) and perhaps Plato's
^Timaeus~
he mastered later, in Latin translation.  He seems to have
seen
something of Seneca's prose.  Of the Christian scholars and
theologians, first of all St. Thomas, then Albertus Magnus,
St.
Augustine, Hugh and Richard of St. Victor, St. Bonaventure,
St.
Bernard, Peter Lombard, and apparently St. Gregory the Great,
St.
Isidore of Seville, Peter Damian, were assiduously consulted;
and
his works show traces of many others.  His principal
historians
were Livy and the Christian Paulus Orosius, author of the
^Historia adversus Paganos~; he knew also several compendiums,
notably the anecdotical compilation of Valerius Maximus.  The
treatises of Aegidius Romanus and John of Paris probably came
under his inspection.  He doubtless was acquainted with the
elder
Pliny and Sulinus; he certainly read the ^Tr$esor~ of Brunetto
Latini, and probably the ^Composizione del mondo~ of Ristoro
d'Arezzo.  Astronomy he pursued with characteristic
thoroughness,
first, perhaps, in the ^Elementa Astronomica~ of Alfraganus.
Some strange words and a deal of curious misinformation he got
from the ^Magnae Derivationes~ of Uguccione da Pisa, who lived
in the second half of the 12th century.  Among the Latin
poets,
besides Virgil, he was intimate with Ovid, Lucan, and Statius,
from whom he derived most of his classical mythology and much
of
his ancient history.  He knew Horace's ^Ars Poetica.~  Many
classical authors whom he had not read were known to him by
name
and reputation; among them, Homer.  Greek and Hebrew he never
learned, save a few isolated words.  Latin, of the rhetorical,
mediaeval sort, he wrote well, but with less ease and
brilliancy than Italian.  He could read and write Proven$cal
and
assuredly knew French.  He was deeply versed in the lyric
poetry
of southern France, and was familiar, directly or indirectly,
with the epics of the north.  He had critically examined the
work of the Italian poets who had preceded him in Sicily,
Tuscany, and Bologna; his estimates are to be found, not only
in
his ^De Vulgari Eloquentia~, but also incidentally in the
^Vita
Nuova~ and the ^Divina Commedia.~  His own lyrics, by the way,
reveal a skill far excelling that of any of his forebears.
The
learning acquired by all this study was not wasted: it
reappears
in the ^Divine Comedy.~  This great poem, unrivaled as it is
for
sustained grandeur of thought and symmetry of form, resolves
itself, upon careful analysis, into at least six diverse
elements, fused by genius into a single masterpiece --
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Quasi conflati insieme, per tal modo
     Che ci@o ch' i' dico @e un semplice lume.'  ^Par.~ XXXII, 89, 90.
..TEXT:
Six literary types are blended into one: the Encyclopaedia,
the
Journey, the Vision, the Autobiography, the Praise of Woman,
the
Allegory.
..TEXT:
8.  The idea of a practical compendium of human knowledge
was not unknown to the old Romans: Pliny, for instance,
composed
the ^Historia Naturalis~, Celsus the ^De Artibus.~  To the
borderland of ancient and mediaeval times belongs that famous
compilation, the ^Origines~ or ^Etymologiae~ of St. Isidore of
Seville.  Others followed, not only in Latin but also in the
vulgar tongues; and then came the attempt to give such works
poetic form: witness, for example, the French ^Image du monde~
and the Proven$cal ^Breviari d'Amors~, a huge allegorized
treatise, written and widely diffused in Dante's lifetime.  In
Dante's own city lived Brunetto Latini, author of the French
^Tr$esor~ and also of the Italian ^Tesoretto~, a versified
guide
to learning in the semblance of a mystic journey -- that same
Latini who taught the youthful poet 'come l' uom s' etterna.'
The ^Commedia~ contains the essentials of the vital science,
theology, with a full discussion of difficult problems; also
the
principles of the ancillary discipline, philosophy.  It
offers,
furthermore, a complete course in astronomy and cosmography,
with
occasional lessons in physics, and much incidental instruction
in
history and mythology.  And this solid doctrine is not to be
regarded as intrusive; it forms, so to speak, the nucleus of
the
whole work.
..TEXT:
9.  Among the travelers' tales that delighted the
wonder-loving public none were better liked than those which
told
of journeys to the Garden of Eden; and of these the most
famous
was the ^Voyage of St. Brendan~, the narrative of an Irish
monk
who sailed out into the Atlantic and after marvelous
adventures
discovered the Isles of the Blest.  It is in Dante's
^Purgatorio~, and especialiy in his description of the Earthly
Paradise, that the influence of such stories is most evident.
The inaccessibility, the wall of fire, the birds, the flowers,
the streams, the eternal springtime are traditional features;
even the lovely youthful figure of Matilda, genius of the
place,
has a counterpart in the ^St. Brendan.~  Some authorities put
the
Garden on a remote mountain-top, others consigned it to a
distant
island.  Dante combined these locations, and made his Eden the
summit of a lone peak rising sky-high from the midst of the
great
ocean.  The spot where man first sinned is directly opposite
Jerusalem, where he was redeemed.
..TEXT:
10.  In 2 Corinthians xii, St Paul declares that 'he was
caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it
is
not lawful for a man to utter.'  What he saw and heard he
refused
to tell, but posterity was less discreet.  Toward the end of
the
4th century there appeared a Greek document, found, it was
said,
in the apostle's house in Tarsus -- the ^Apocalypse of St.
Paul.~
Though denounced by St. Augustine, and never accepted by the
Church, it enjoyed an immense vogue, and was turned into
Syriac
and Latin.  The Latin ^Visio Sancti Pauli~ -- which tells how
the
Chosen Vessel, led by an angel, visited the realms of the dead
--
formed the basis of several versions in the vulgar tongues of
Europe.  But it stood by no means alone.  Visions too numerous
to
tell were seen and invented for many centuries; conspicuous
among
them are those described in two Irish tales, the ^Tundal~ and
^St. Patrick's Purgatory~; in Dante's own country there was
recorded the ^Visio Alperici.~  Most of these treat of the
lower
world, in which Hell and Purgatory lie side by side.  A large
part of the punishments portrayed by Dante were commonplaces
of
vision literature; but he avoided the extremes of coarseness
and
grotesqueness, and introduced system and fitness where all had
been chaotic.  It was his happy idea, moreover, to lift
Purgatory
to the earth's surface, place it far from Hell, next to the
Garden of Eden, and surround it with an atmosphere of light
and
hope.  Meanwhile St. Paul's reticence had borne other fruit.
A
Neo-Platonic treatise, not earlier than the 5th century, ^On
the
Celestial Hierarchy~, dealing with the heavens and the
Heavenly
Intelligences, had been ascribed to Dionysius the Areopagite,
the
apostle's convert in Athens, and was supposed to contain an
authentic record of revelation confided by the master to his
disciple.  Dante's classification of heavens and angels is
founded on this work.  But heathen as well as Christian could
dream dreams of the hereafter.  The ^Somnium Scipionis~ in
Cicero's ^De Re Publica~ depicts good souls rising to the
stars,
and the petty earth in the centre of nine revolving spheres.
If
Homer's account of a descent into the world of the departed
was
unknown in the Middle Ages, those of Ovid, Lucan, and Statius
were familiar to scholars, and Virgil's was before every
schoolboy's eyes.  Dante's Hell is full of Virgilian names;
Christian and pagan figures are strangely commingled.  This
must
have seemed less incongruous to the author than to us, for in
his
day the gods of classic mythology were regarded as demons,
fallen
angels who had seduced mankind to worship them.  Furthermore,
Dante thought of the ancient poets as seers, who had some
inkling
of the truth, and in veiled language told of things that
became
fully known only through the word of God: for instance, when
Ovid
sang of the Golden Age, or the battle of the giants, he was
dimly
conscious of the state of man before the fall, and the revolt
of
the angels against their Maker.
..TEXT:
11.  The ^Divine Comedy~ is not only an Encyclopaedia,
a Journey, a Vision -- it is the Autobiography of a soul.  The
events of his external life Dante scrupulously excluded from
his
works: he never mentions his parents, his children, nor, in
all
probability, his wife; an apparent reference to his sister, in
the ^Vita Nuova~, is couched in the vaguest terms; only
incidentally and rarely does he afford a passing glimpse of
his
material affairs.  His ^Vita Nuova~, professedly the story of
his
youth, is the most baffling record ever penned.  In his
opinion,
it is not meet to speak of one's self: 'parlare alcuno di s@e
medesimo pare non licito,' he declares in the ^Convivio.~
This
maxim evidently does not apply, however, to the inner self,
provided that self be generalized into a type of mankind, and
provided the recounting of its experiences be helpful to other
erring souls -- 'quando per ragionare di s@e grandissima
utilit@a
ne segue altrui per via di dottrina.'  Like St. Paul and
Aeneas, Dante had a mission, a vital message for humanity.
The
^Divine Comedy~ is the epic of remorse, repentance,
purification,
and final uplifting.  Incidentally it depicts the depravity;
of
the world and points the way to social regeneration.  For a
work
of this kind Dante had a great example in the ^Confessions~ of
St. Augustine, and another, allegorically conceived, in
Boethius's ^Consolatio Philosophiae.~
..TEXT:
12.  From the dawn of amorous poetry in Provence it was
the habit of the bard to vaunt the charms of his mistress and
her
superiority to the rest of her sex, attributing to her
influence
all credit for such gifts as he himself might possess.  His
life,
he alleged, was given to her service, his verse was a tribute
to
her power.  Such a tribute, but a loftier more enduring one,
Dante determined to pay to his lady: 'spero' he says,' di dire
di
lei quello che mai non fu detto d' alcuna.'  The ^Divine
Comedy~
is a monument to Beatrice, and, in truth, such a monument as
never was erected, before nor after, to any woman.
..TEXT:
13.  'Sciendum est,' declares the letter to Can Grande,
referring to the ^Divina Commedia~, 'quod istius operis non
est
simplex sensus, immo dici potest polisemos, hoc est plurium
sensuum; nam alius sensus est qui habetur per literam, alius
est
qui habetur per significata per litteram.  Et primus dicitur
litteralis, secundus vero allegoricus, sive mysticus.'
Allegorical interpretation had been applied by the ancient
Hebrews to the prophecies of the Old Testament, and by the
Greeks
-- in late, sophisticated times -- to the Homeric poems.  It
was
early applied also to some of the Latin poets.  The ^Aeneid~
was regularly so expounded; a commentary of this kind was
surely
known to Dante.  The method reached its highest development,
however, in the explanation of the Bible by the Church
fathers.
In the second book of the ^Convivio~ Dante discusses it at
length; and there he differentiates theological from poetic
allegory.  In the former the literal as well as the mystic
sense
is true, while in poetry the letter is fiction and truth
resides
in the allegory alone.  The Old Testament is an accurate
record
of fact, but at the same time a prophecy of the New; whereas
the
fable of Orpheus is literally false and only metaphorically
true.
Furthermore, Dante distinguishes, in addition to the literal
and
the allegorical, a moral and an anagogical meaning: the one is
merely the useful inference that the reader may draw from a
story, for the guidance of his own life; the other, which is
obscurely defined, seems to be a revelation of spiritual
truth,
hidden in the words of the text.  Dante himself, in the
interpretation of his ^canzoni~ in the ^Convivio~, confines
his
attention to the literal and the allegorical senses.
Allegorical
composition was to Dante not an artificial but a natural
process.
He lived in a world of mystic correspondences.  Numbers,
stars,
stones, beasts, had a mysterious significance; even the events
of
history were fraught with symbolic meaning.  The relation of
fact
to symbol was not arbitrary nor fortuitous; it was real and
predestined; for Dante combined mystic symbolism with formal
allegory.  Thus in his poem the outer and the inner narratives
seem indissolubly bound; neither obstructs the other, neither
is
complete without the other, and to the intelligent reader the
two
are of equal interest.  The ^Divine Commedy~ is perhaps the
only
great allegory of which this can be said to-day.  In Bunyan's
^Pilgrim's Progress~, for example, the literal story is too
crude
and fantastic to please any but a child and the symbolism
appeals
only to the adult.  In the ^Roman de la Rose~ the allegory is
ingenious and artistically attractive, but the literal fable
is
insignificant; while the converse is true of Spenser's ^Faerie
Queene.~
..TEXT:
14.  In exposition, says Dante, 'sempre lo litterale dee
andare innanzi'; and he adds, describing his interpretation of
his own ^canzoni~, 'ragioner@o prima la litterale sentenza, e
appresso di quella ragioner@o la sua allegoria, cio@e l'ascosa
verit@a.'  We may pursue the same course.  Literally, then,
the
^Divina Commedia~ is the narrative of a journey through Hell,
Purgatory, and Heaven.  The poet, in the middle of his life,
finds himself astray at night in a dark wood.  He tries to
save
himself by climbing a mountain whose top is lit by the rays of
the rising sun; but three beasts, besetting his path, are
about
to drive him back, when Virgil, summoned to Dante's help by
Beatrice, at the bidding of Mary and St. Lucia, appears and
offers to guide him.  They can escape from the wood only by
going
through the earth from side to side.  This path leads them
through the whole of Hell, where Dante sees the punishment of
every kind of sin and converses with the damned.  Hell ends at
the earth's centre, and from that point the poets climb out by
a
dark, undescribed channel to the opposite hemisphere.  They
emerge in the middle of the ocean, on the shore of an island
which consists mainly of a colossal mountain.  Cato of Utica,
the
guardian of the place, meets and directs them.  Up the steep
mountain-side Dante drags himself, still accompanied by
Virgil.
On the ledges are repentant souls preparing themselves by
discipline for the heavenly life.  As Dante and Virgil are
approaching the summit, they are joined by Statius, who has
just
completed his penance.  The three mount together to the top,
where they find the Garden of Eden, and in it a fair, happy,
amorous young maiden, Matilda, who seems to embody the spirit
of
the place.  Amid the trees and flowers they witness a pageant
of
the Church, or Triumph of Revelation, whose culmination is the
appearance of Beatrice in a shower of lilies thrown by angels.
Now Virgil vanishes, and presently Statius is mentioned for
the
last time.  Beatrice it is who leads Dante up from earth
through
the revolving heavens into the real Paradise, which is the
presence of the Almighty, and consigns him to St. Bernard, the
great mystic.  There has been unrolled before us a picture of
mankind, past and present, and a view of the universe.
Dante's
conception of the world is essentially symmetrical and
organic;
there is exact correspondence between the physical, the
intellectual, and the spiritual.  The poem ends with the
vision
of God.
..TEXT:
15.  In its 'allegorical and true sense' the ^Divine
Comedy~ is the history of a soul struggling with sin and, with
celestial help, winning peace.  The wood typifies the worldly
life; the sunlit mountain, righteousness; the three beasts,
evil
habits, which make reform impossible for the unaided soul.
But
divine Mercy and Grace send Revelation to direct it -- that
heavenly enlightenment or superhuman Wisdom which ^Beatrix~,
the
Bestower of Blessings, had always personified in Dante's eyes.
For direct Revelation the sinner is not yet fit; he must
approach
it through Reason.  So Virgil, who typifies human
understanding,
discloses to Dante the true nature of sin in all its
hideousness
and folly: for the punishments of Hell so minutely described,
are
but the image of the sins themselves.  When Reason has probed
sinfulness to the bottom Dante horrified turns his back upon
it
and painfully wrests his soul from its clutches; such is the
significance of the laborious but uneventful journey from the
centre of the earth to the Island of Purgatory.  As yet,
however,
Dante has merely weaned himself from evil practices; he has
still
to cleanse his soul so that wrongdoing shall no longer attract
it
-- to purify it and prepare it for the sight of God.  This can
be
accomplished only by discipline, under the guidance of the
Church.  Then, as the shackles of sin are removed, the soul
once
more ehjoys its inborn liberty; it regains the Free Will,
God's
most precious gift to man.  Of all the doctrines that Dante
expounds, that of Free Will is closest to his heart -- the
wholesome doctrine of individual responsibility.  And Cato,
Dante's favorite character in all history -- Cato, who gave up
life to assert his independence -- is made its exponent.  The
torments on the terraces of Purgatory represent the penances
that
the soul, under proper direction, must undergo before it can
return to its first freedom and innocence.  As Dante
approaches
the top, some questions confront him which Reason alone cannot
quite solve; and to answer them, apparently, comes Statius, or
human understanding illumined by Christianity.  When the soul
has
regained its original purity -- has climbed to its Garden of
Eden
-- and is restored to the primeval life of innocence and
activity
(which Matilda seems to symbolize), it has no more need of
Reason, for all its instincts are unerring.  Then, after the
true
glories of the Church are unfolded before its eyes, it can
follow
Revelation through heaven after heaven, ever nearer and nearer
to
the real Paradise, until at last it stands before its Maker.
In
the presence of the Source of all knowledge, even Revelation
is
superfluous; Beatrice resigns her great office, leaving Dante
in
the charge of St. Bernard, the type of Intuition.  'Blessed
are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God.'
..TEXT:
16.  If to the literal and the allegorical we must add a
moral and an anagogical interpretation, we may assume that
morally the poem is a warning against sin, an exhortation and
guide to repentance, and an incentive to religious
contemplation.
Anagogically, the poet may be said to portray in Hell the
wicked
world as he knows it, in Purgatory the rescue of the elect,
and
in Paradise the kingdom which is to come.
..TEXT:
17.  The epithet 'Divine' became attached to the poem in
the 16th century through its use in the edition of 1555.  The
title which Dante gave his work is ^Commedia~ (or, as he
pronounced it, ^Comed$ia~), meaning a poetic composition in a
style intermediate between the sustained nobility of tragedy
and
the popular tone of elegy; according to the letter to Can
Grande,
the name indicates also a sad beginning and a happy end.  The
author, in fact, does not scruple, on occasion, to sacrifice
elegance and even clearness to brevity, vigor, and pictorial
effect.  He expected to be minutely studied and weighed, not
cursorily read.  The characteristic detail, the specific term,
the appropriate coloring were worth more to him, when he wrote
the ^Commedia~, than any absolute standard of poetic
propriety.
His imagery stamps on the reader's mind an unbroken sequence
of
visual impressions.  An inexhaustible inventiveness, a compact
style, a richly varied and picturesque vocabulary make the
perusal of the ^Commedia~ a series of literary surprises.
Especially when we consider the poverty of the poetic idiom
before Dante, does the master's creative power seem almost
beyond
belief.  His literary medium was virtually his own handiwork.
And this nervous strength, this irrepressible originality do
not
preclude a haunting melodic beauty and a triumphant rhythm
that
remind one of the tramp of many feet marching to sweet music.
Vowel harmonies, pervasive but seldom obtrusive alliteration,
skillful distribution of stress are the elements that combine
to
work the spell.  His language is, in the main, the Florentine
speech of his day, as it sounded in the mouths of cultivated
people.  Mingled with this are a few Gallicisms, some
archaisms,
some words borrowed from other Italian dialects, and a great
many
Latinisms.  The foreign and unusual words and those employed
in a
strange sense occur for the most part in the rime.  Dante was
generallv averse to periphrasis or deviation from his idea,
and
was loath to end a verse with an insignificant word; so he was
sometimes forced to do violence to usage in his rimes.
..TEXT:
18.  Of the external attributes of the ^Divine Comedy~,
the most wonderful is its symmetry.  With all its huge bulk
and
bewilderingly multifarious detail, it is as sharply planned as
a
Gothic cathedral.  Dante had the very uncommon power of fixing
his attention upon the part without losing sight of the whole:
every incident, every character receives its peculiar
development, but at the same time is made to contribute its
exact
share to the total effect.  The more one studies the poem, the
clearer become its general lines, the more intricate its
correspondences, the more elaborate its climaxes.  At the end
of
each ^cantica~ is one of these great culminating points -- the
sight of Lucifer, the appearance of Beatrice, the vision of
God;
and for each of them the reader is insensibly prepared by a
series of gradations whose structure reveals itself only after
long repeated readings.  The arrangement of the ^Commedia~ is
based on the number three, the 'mystic' number, the symbol of
the
Trinity.  Dante shared with most philosophers of his day a
profound belief in the significance of numbers.  The ^Divine
Comedy~ falls into three books, or ^cantiche~, of nearly equal
length; each of these has thirty-three cantos, except that the
^Inferno~ has an additional first canto which serves as an
introduction to the whole.  The total number of cantos is
therefore 100, or the 'perfect' number, ten, multiplied by
itself.  The verse, invented by Dante for this use, is what is
called ^terza rima~, a succession of tiercets in which the
first
and third lines rime together while the middle line rimes with
the first and third of the next ^terzina.~  The metre is the
^endecasillabo~, which had developed long before Dante's time.
It is really the same verse, essentially, as the French
ten-syllable line; but the French take the 'masculine,' or
oxytonic,
verse as the standard, while the Italians take the 'feminine,'
or
paroxytonic.  The Italian line has normally, then, eleven
syllables, with an accent on the tenth: see, for instance,
^Inf.~
I, i.  Occasionally the final unstressed syllable is dropped,
and
the verse becomes 'masculine,' or ^tronco~: for example,
^Inf.~
IV, 60.  Sometimes, on the other hand, an extra unaccented
syliable is added, making a dactyllic ending, and the line is
called ^sdrucciolo~: e. g., ^Inf.~ XXIV, 66.  In counting
syllables, contiguous vowels, whether in the same word or in
adjacent words, are generally reckoned as one, being blended
together, as in ^Inf.~ I, 25-6:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Co-s@i -- l' a-ni-mo -- mio -- ch' an-cor -- fug-gi-va
     Si -- vol-se a-re-tro a -- ri-mi-rar -- lo -- pas-so.'
..TEXT:
But often two vowels which in prose may make separate
syllables
are allowed to count as two in verse; this is regularly done
at
the end of a line; so ^Inf.~ I, 12:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Che -- la -- ve-ra-ce -- vi-a ab-ban-do-na-i.'
..TEXT:
It is done also in Latin words, as in ^Inf.~ XXXIV, 1:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Vexilla regis prode-unt inferni.'
..TEXT:
Besides the fixed accent on the tenth syllable of every line,
there must be a stress either on the fourth or on the sixth,
as
in ^Inf.~ I, 1-2:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Nel mezzo del camm$in di nostra v$ita
     Mi ritrovii per una selva oscura.'
..TEXT:
In point of fact, however, Dante almost always has a more
regular
alternation of strong and weak syllables -- a movement more
nearly approaching that of English poetry -- than this
theoretical scheme would indicate; see, for instance, ^Inf.~
V, 106:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     'Am$or cond$usse n$oi ad $una m$orte.'
..TEXT:
19.  The ^Divina Commedia~ has come down to us in nearly
600 manuscripts, none of them in the author's hand, and none
taken directly from the original; upwards of 200 are in
Florence,
the others are collected in Italy or scattered over Europe.
Many
are beautifully illuminated.  Although some of the manuscripts
go
back to a time within fifteen or twenty years of Dante's
death,
these copies are by no means in full agreement with one
another;
furthermore, the early commentators cite variants: it is
evident
that the corruption of the text set in as soon as the poet
died,
perhaps even before his decease.  The poem was first printed
in
1472.  In 1502 appeared the Aldo Manuzio edition, in 1595 that
of
the Accademia della Crusca; these were for centuries regarded
as
authoritative.  There was no critical edition until 1862, when
K.
Witte published one based on four good manuscripts; for one
canto
he also collected over 400 manuscripts.  Three years later A.
Mussafia brought out a collation of two manuscripts.  After a
long interval came editions by P. Toynbee and G. Vandelli.  A
fruitless attempt to establish a genealogical sequence of
manuscripts was made by G. A. Scartazzini.  No satisfactory
classification of manuscripts has been made; but it is certain
that no existing manuscript or group of manuscripts can be
regarded as authoritative throughout.  In 1894 appeared the
'Oxford Dante,' ^Tutte le opere di Dante Alighieri~, edited by
E.
Moore (3d ed., 1904); the ^Divine Comedy~ in this volume is
based
primarily on Witte's text, but Dr. Moore has examined for
crucial passages some 200 manuscripts, and has made use of the
investigations of other scholars.  The text published in 1921
by
the Society Dantesca Italiana (Bemporad, Florence) is due to
G.
Vandelli, who from year to year had revised the Scartazzini
edition; Vandelli has clung as closely as possible to one
manuscript, the Trivulziano a carefully written one and the
earliest in real Florentine.
..TEXT:
20.  Countless allusions, some of them purposely blind
vast accumulations of learning, conciseness and originality of
phrase, symbolism, not infrequent obscurity combine to
obstruct
the understanding of the poem.  Some of the difficulties we
encounter are due to our remoteness from Dante's world, our
different habits of thought, the archaic character of his
language.  Many of them, however, were as great in his day as
in
ours, and the need of interpretation was immediately felt.  At
least eleven commentaries on the whole or a part of the work
were
composed in the 14th century; from the 15th century we have
five.  The first commentator certainly known to us by name is
Graziolo de' Bambaglioli, who goes back as early as 1324.
Within
sixteen years after him were written the expositions of Jacopo
della Lana, those of Dante's sons Jacopo, who expounded the
^Inferno~ in Italian and Pietro, who expounded the whole poem
in
Latin, and the work known as the 'Ottimo Commento,' probably
made
in 1325.  To the latter part of the 14th century belong the
exegeses of Boccaccio, who was appointed to expound the
^Commedia~ in Florence but carried his explanation no further
than the 16th line of canto 17, of Benvenuto da Imola, and of
Buti.  The best informed of all these are perhaps Pietro and
Benvenuto.  All, however, must be used with caution, as they
were
deficient in poetic insight, and in historical matters did not
always discriminate between fact and invention.  The task of
interpretation has been carried on, with greater or less
intelligence and erudition, down to our own day.  To keep well
abreast of the Dante literature that now appears from year to
year would require a man's whole time.  At present three
recent,
copiously annotated Italian editions are at the disposal of
students, those of G. A. Scartazzini (revised bv G. Vandelli),
T.
Casini, and F. Torraca.  There is a scholarly English edition,
with a translation, by A. J. Butler.  Of the numerous English
versions, the prose rendering by Norton, the unrimed poetic
translations of Longfellow, Johnson, and Langdon, and
Shadwell's
^Purgatory~ and ^Paradiso~ in four-line stanzas excel in
accuracy
and literary skill; the easiest to read is that of Cary, in
blank
verse; Plumptre's and Anderson's, in ^terza rima~, combine
fidelity with happy phrasing and acceptable versification.
Perhaps the happiest combination of accuracy and poetic
feeling
is to be found in J. B. Fletcher's modification of ^terza
rima.~
Several volumes of general studies are especially to be
commended: F. D'Ovidio, ^Studii sulla Divina Commedia, Il
Purgatorio e il suo preludio, Nuovi studii danteschi~; E.
Moore,
^Studies in Dante~, 4 vols.; H. Hauvette, ^Dante: Introduction
@a la Divine Com$edie~, 1911; C. H. Grandgent ^Dante~, 1915,
^The Power of Dante~, 1918, ^Discourses on Dante~, 1924; J. B.
Fletcher, ^Dante~ 1916; E. G. Parodi, ^Poesia e storia nella
"Divina Commedia~," 1921; G. L. Passerini, ^Dante~, 1921; B.
Croce, ^La Poesia di Dante~, 1921; K. Vossler, ^Die g,ottliche
Kom,odie. Entwicklungs Geschichte und Erkl,arung~, 2 vols.; I.
Del Lungo, ^Dal secolo e dal Poema di Dante~; F. Novati, ^Con
Dante e Per Dante~; F. De Sanctis, ^Saggi critici~ and ^Nuovi
saggi critici~; K. Witte, ^Essays on Dante~; G. A.
Scartazzini,
^Prolegomeni della Divina Commedia.~  For the allegory there
is
nothing better than F. Flamini, ^I significati reconditi della
Divina Commedia e il suo fine supremo~, 3 vols.  Noteworthy
also is J. B. Fletcher's ^Symbolism of the Divine Comedy~,
1921.  To those who read German, F. X. Kraus's comprehensive
and
beautifully illustrated ^Dante~ may be recommended.  N.
Zingarelli's ^Dante~ and ^La vita di Dante in compendio~ and
^La
vita, le opere e i tempi di Dante~ contain full and accurate
information concerning the poet's life and works.  See also C.
A.
Dinsmore, ^Life of Dante Alighieri~, 1919.  Excellent
handbooks
are E. G. Gardner's ^Dante~ and F. Flamini's ^Introduction to
the Study oj the Divine Comedy~, 1911 (translated by F. M.
Josselyn); C. A. Dinsmore's ^Aids to the Study of Dante~ is a
convenient compilation.  E. A. Fay's ^Concordance of the
Divine
Comedy~, E. K. Rand and E. H. Wilkins's ^Concordanza delle
opere
latine di Dante Alighieri~, and E. S. Sheldon and A. C.
White's
^Concordanza delle opere italiane in prosa e del canzoniere di
Dante Alighieri~ are invaluable helps.  Most useful for
reference
are P. Toynbee's ^Dictionary of Proper Names and Notable
Matters
in the Works of Dante~ and G. A. Scartazzini's ^Enciclopedia
dantesca.~  Works of a more special character are mentioned,
as
occasion arises, in the preceding and the following pages.
..TEXT:
THIS work, the first annotated edition of the Italian
text of the ^Divine Comedy~ published in America, is intended
primarily for the general literary public, though adapted also
to
academic use.  I have aimed to make it so complete that
readers
will need for the comprehension of the poem, no other book
save
their dictionary; but to those (may they be many!) who may be
led
to push their inquiry further, a great abundance of
bibliographical suggestion has been offered.  Remembering how
often the ^Commedia~ is read and enjoyed by persons whose
Italian
equipment is scanty, I have explained in the notes many words
and
forms that present no difficulty to the experienced student.
On
the other hand, I have endeavored, by discarding a vast
accumulation of interesting but unnecessary erudition, so to
curtail the annotation that the reader's attention shall not
be
constantly distracted from the text.  This alleviation has
been
facilitated by the relegation of all lengthy discussions and
involved explanations to the arguments that precede the
several
cantos.  In my interpretation I have tried to give the
'allegorical and true meaning,' as Dante calls it, the place
it
deserves, but seldom receives, beside the literal.  The text
here
printed is based on the latest edition of Moore's Oxford
Dante; I
have, however, not neglected the recent investigations of
other
scholars.  The punctuation has been made to conform, as far as
possible, to modern English standards.  I am under obligations
to
all the authorities cited in the following pages.  For many
notes
I owe a particular debt to Torraca's edition and to Norton's
translation of the poem.  It gives me pleasure to acknowledge
also the special benefit I have derived from the works of
Moore,
Toynbee, Gardner, Del Lungo, Novati, D'Ovidio, Zingarelli,
Flamini, and Vossler.
..AUTH:
..PUBL:
..EDTR:
..NOTE:
..DENT:
..CNTO:
..LINE:
..ENDL:
..LRNG:
..REFS:
..BTXT:
..TCHR:
