		Rationale for Using the Computer

[Edited Sept 15 by stc.]

The goal of the Dartmouth Dante Project is both to make a substantial
body of commentaries on the Divine Comedy available to any Dante
student or scholar wherever he or she may be and to provide this
material on a convenient medium, the computer workstation, on which one
can analyze and synthesize these scholarly works.  The project uses
modern data processing and computing technology and methods: the
commentaries have been selected and will be entered with indices, where
these exist. A substantial database is thereby being constructed. The
source materials require the addition of codes to facilitate the
retrieval and other uses of the database. A major effort is being made
to provide quality controls on the handling of the texts and their
editing, where necessary. Appropriate hardware and software have been
selected and acquired to support the database and the user. Since no
special experience with the source documents will be assumed, a
user-friendly man-machine interface will have to be created (the
prototype of this already exists). Computer programming will have to
done to create the user interface (the storage and retrieval software
already exists and is marketed by the Bibliographic Retrieval Service
company--BRS). Dissemination is a major goal of the project, so that
several different modes of use of the database with its software will
be created: briefly, these are 1) use of Dartmouth's computer system -
either at Dartmouth or via common carrier from any location - with
either a standard computer terminal or a microcomputer workstation; 2)
use of another computer system similar to Dartmouth's which has a copy
of the database; 3) use of a microcomputer workstation that itself
contains a complete copy of the database.  A standalone workstation
that contains the entire database is being made possible through the
use of the emerging laser disk technology which makes it possible to
store hundreds of millions of characters on a disk the size of
pancake.


			Data Entry


Nearly all of the commentaries of interest have been printed, almost
all using modern type fonts; therefore, these works can be read by the
most sophisticated optical scanning equipment.


During the spring of 1983, two graduate students in computing at
Dartmouth did a survey of the available scanning equipment. Two vendors
market equipment which is potentially able to input the printed Dante
commentaries. By a major stroke of good fortune for the Dartmouth Dante
Project, Dartmouth College has acquired one of these systems, a
Kurzweil Data Entry Machine (KDEM). Note that Oxford and Glasgow
Universities in Britain and Brigham Young University also have such
machines.


We are using Dartmouth's KDEM machine and its professional operations
staff to create machine-readable versions of the various commentaries.
The number of printed pages is approximately 100,000. Of the 60-80 or
so texts which we will use, some are printed using the same type fonts.
The KDEM has to "learn" to read each different document's font. Set-up
activity can be avoided when several documents printed in the same font
can be read in series. The texts which are not readable by the KDEM
will require manual entry, making use of a computer-based screen
editor. (We estimate that no more than 25% of all texts will require
manual entry.)


Many documents are being photocopied in their "home" library; then
these photocopies will be scanned by the KDEM.  At this stage we expect
that there will be some scanning errors; no machine is error-proof.
The editorial co-ordinator will compare the photocopy to the
computerized text and will correct any errors on the spot.  The
resulting text will be entered into a computer workstation and then be
edited by our humanist colleagues, all of whom are expert at reading
Dante and the commentaries.

The editorial co-ordinator will have to make other changes as well. Our
system will use the line numbers of each canto of the Divine Comedy as
search and retrieval criteria; yet not all of the editions have been
printed with the exact line numbers. A trained human editor can
recognize this situation and impute what is lacking in the original
text. These editorial enhancements will make our database uniform and
facilitate its use.


All non-standard characters, especially accent marks, will be preserved
in the database. If the KDEM misses some occasional marks, then the
editorial co-ordinator will put them in.


A sample of all editorial work will be examined by another person
independently. Thus, the project will involve four editorial
interventions for each commentary: 1) double entry via the KDEM and
resultant listing of differing entries; 2) the editorial co-ordinator
will examine the final version; 3) one of the three dantisti in the
project (Hollander, Vickers, Brownlee) will go over that text; 4)
Hollander will "spot check" all entries during the third year of the
project. It should be remembered that the result is not a printed book;
as users find remaining errors they can (as they will be requested to
do) notify us so that we may correct the database. At all stages of
editing, sources of untoward error rates will be sought and corrective
measures taken in order to assure quality control.

		Use of the Dartmouth Dante

The scholarly user of the Dartmouth Dante will have a variety of
methods available for accessing the stored text of the commentators.
These methods include, but are not limited to, accessing:

1. By the name of the author of the commentary; the system will make
available a selected section of an entire commentary; it will also be
possible to duplicate an entire commentary using the Dartmouth Dante
system.

2. By the name of the cantica of the Divine Comedy or by the name of
the cantica plus the canto number or by the name of the cantica plus
the canto number plus the line number (or a range of line numbers). The
system will retrieve only the specified text from the stored
commentaries and will indicate the commentaries selected by displaying
a list of their authors together with a simple access number.

3. By a keyword or phrase or arbitrary compounding of keywords and
phrases. Boolean compounding using AND, OR, and NOT operations,
together with ADJACENT and WITH modifiers. AND refers to both keyword
phrases being present in the commentary text; OR refers to at least one
of the keyword phrases being present; NOT refers to the logical
opposite of present, i.e., it refers to the text where the keyword
phrase is not present; ADJACENT joins two keyword phrases which must be
in the same sentence of the commentary text to be selected.  WITH joins
two keyword phrases which must be in the same sentence of the
commentary text to be selected. The system will indicate the
commentaries selected by displaying a list of their authors together
with a simple access number.


		The User Interface

The user interface will be simple, yet it will be flexible. The
existing prototype was built so that users could respond to a
particular system's features. The final system will improve upon the
prototype (a subject addressed below). It will not be necessary for a
user to know how to program in any computer language.  All of the
user's directions will be communicated to the Dartmouth Dante system
using "menus" and "commands." A menu is a list of actions from which
the user may choose one for the system to carry out; specification of
any one action would be necessary to accomplish any activity. A command
is a directive which the user may give at specified times to accomplish
some particular action.  A session between the user and the computer
would involve a sequence of menu choices and command directives which
the user would indicate to the computer in an interactive fashion. The
computer would respond to each user request, and each menu will provide
an explanation of the choices; each command will have a "help" option.
In this way the system will provide a supportive and reassuring
environment for the user. Documentation will complement these "on-line"
facilities: a user's primer and a reference manual for the Dartmouth
Dante system will be written and disseminated.

 The Dante Data Base

The Dante database as proposed herein consists of the equivalent of one
hundred thousand typed pages of text. If we assume that a typed page
has 55 lines of 65 characters and spaces (one-inch margins on all four
sides), then the Dante database is approximately 360 million
characters.

The efficient searching and retrieval of a database of this size
implies the use of an index and sophisticated search software.  Both an
efficient indexing scheme and sophisticated search software are already
in place at Dartmouth. In 1980, the Dartmouth Library acquired
generalized search/retrieval software and associated system building
tools from Bibliographic Retrieval Services, Inc. (BRS). BRS is the
industry leader in constructing computerized, on-line retrieval
services. The BRS/SEARCH software is currently fully operation on two
Digital Equipment Corporation VAX computers at Dartmouth; these
machines run the Berkeley version of the UNIX (trademark of Bell
Laboratories, Inc.) operating system The BRS software is written
entirely in the high-level language C, and it takes advantage of
several UNIX utility programs and other system facilities (for example,
"pipes").

BRS/SEARCH system employs a trade-secret text compression algorithm for
the primary database. In addition, this system uses an inverted file
index strategy for efficient searching.  Using BRS' system, it is
possible to store the inverted file indices and the complete text in a
compressed format, where the size of both is only one per cent greater
than the original text.  This is a remarkable achievement, and it means
that the user will not have to pay a significant premium for storage of
the inverted file index, which makes it possible to search such a large
data base "while you wait." As a point of comparison, the Dartmouth
College Library's entire catalog of 1.6 million titles is using this
same BRS/SEARCH system. Its database is ten per cent larger.  It is
possible to search Dartmouth's entire library holdings for any
reasonable set of titles in under one minute of elapsed time.
Retrieval of two thousand titles (from the 1.6 million) takes under
thirty seconds, although one might not find such a search by itself
entirely useful.


In summary, we propose to use existing BRS/SEARCH system software on an
existing Dartmouth computer for the Dartmouth Dante database.


Not all pieces of the system exist, at present. We shall need to write
software to edit the Dante database in several ways.  First, the KDEM
will produce spurious data characters which will need to be removed.
Second, the editorial co-ordinator will find KDEM "reading" errors, as
well as those created by manual entry, which will need to be cleaned
up.

Another important system module is the user interface program.  BRS
provides a software tool for constructing custom user interfaces.  With
this tool we shall build a user interface based on menus and command
language, which the user will be able to master in a few minutes of use
of the system.

The creation of a substantial database involves the provision of data
control checks and balances, and the back-up of all active data sets,
as work progresses.  Our database administrator will control access to
the data sets and control the sequence of processing, especially
editing and updating of the database. The principles of data base
administration are well known and are analogous to auditing controls
used in the business sector.

The Prototype as Indication of Future Needs of the Scholarly User

Experience with the prototype system has suggested that there are
several capabilities that should be provided the Dante scholar when he
or she is working with the database:

1. User-friendly menus and commands (see Appendix III for the
prototype's experimental version of these);

2. Scroll-back of information on previous screens;

3. Multiple display-windows for comparative analysis of several
commentaries;

4. Programmable function keys to allow straightforward interactions
with the database;

5. Full word-processing capacity, including screen editing.

These capabilities can be provided in either of two ways: by the VAX
computer linked to a conventional terminal or within an intelligent,
microcomputer-based terminal. We have chosen the latter course because
the implementation of these capabilities would place a substantial
burden on the VAX were it not to be assisted by a microcomputer in the
user's terminal.

			Dissemination

There are three principal ways in which the full range of the Dartmouth
Dante Project's capacity will reach an interactive audience. An exact
duplicate of the database with the BRS/SEARCH software can be set up
and the database supplied in VAX/UNIX format on industry-standard
magnetic tape, with the workstation software distributed on standard 5
and 1/4 inch diskettes. (Diskettes and documentation will be made
available to users at cost--approximately $5 per item.) The second way
involves direct use of one of the Dartmouth VAX computers either
locally or via one of several public data networks.  In addition to
these two means of interacting fully with the system, there is also
possible the more limited use which a student or scholar might wish to
make, requesting a printout of a section of the database (at a cost of
about ten cents per page).  The third way would involve copying the
entire database onto small laser disks and mailing them, along with
standard diskettes containing the search software, to users with
workstations equipped with laser disk readers.  Currently the cost of
replicating a laser disk is approximately $10 after the original
mastering; laser disk readers cost in the range of $3,000.

Dartmouth has had wide experience in the worldwide distribution of
educational software, complete computer operating systems and
languages, documentation, and databases. With particular regard to the
dissemination of this project it should be noted that Dartmouth is an
active member of the Research Library Group (RLG) and is prepared to
make this project available over RLG's computer network as libraries
develop interest in providing access to the database contained in the
Dartmouth Dante.
