Translation of Article appearing in "Il Messaggero" Nov. 16, 1990.

KNOWING DANTE WITH A COMPUTER: Complete success for the conference led
by Professor Robert Hollander in honor of the fiftieth anniversary of
the "Alighieri" Junior Highschool.

by Valeria Dionisia

Students with knapsacks on their shoulders, alumni and faculty got
together yesterday afternoon in the hall of the Chamber of Commerce for
"Dante and the Computer".  For the fiftieth anniversary of the Ravennese
Junior Highschool, Professor Robert Hollander of the American
university of Princeton, revealed the contents of his computer database
and amazed the crowd by "leafing through" it like the pages of a book.

There was a parade of information, data, commentaries and authors
belonging to the huge world of Dante.  At the same podium the
mathematician Carlo Felice Manara of the University of Milan confessed
that he felt "a trifle humiliated that the Italians were not the ones
to accomplish this task".  The discussion, predictably enough, quickly
turned to themes of technological progress, the importance of the
"classics" and on the responsibilities of education.

"My fear," -- thundered Professor Manara from his post as chairman
- "is that machines reduce the potential of our brains, that we use
these instruments passively".  Firm in his ideas of the duties of
education, Manara added that "by now, instead of continuing to furnish
information, they should be teaching how to reject useless
information".

Regarding the abbandonment of the study of Dante and of the fathers of
"our language", Carlo Felice Manara pointed to the tragic results that
it has produced: "Italian schools instruct but don't educate," -- said
the mathematician -- "the narrowing of the vocabulary of our youth is
colossal, even the word `sponsor'," -- he ironized -- "seems to have
fallen into disuse from the time it was discovered to be of latin
origin".  The final quote seemed obligatory: "You were not made to live
like brute beasts ... [but to seek after virtue and knowledge --
_Aeneid_]".
