..COMM:
Ruskin
..LANG:
English
..PUBD:
1903
..LODD:
040428
\~ Date was Replaced
..DTYP:
T
..CTCA:
30-Paradiso
..CNTO:
6
..LINE:
128
..ENDL:
128
..LRNG:
128
..REFS:
EN-A30-O6-L128 A30-O6-L128
..TEXT:
How [Charles] had got his wife, and her
dowry, we must hear in Villani's words, as nearly as I can give
their force in English, only, instead of the English word
pilgrim, I shall use the Italian `romeo' for the sake both of all
English Juliets, and that you may better understand the close of
the sixth canto of the Paradise. . . .
..TEXT:
"There came a romeo to court, returning from the shrine
of St. James." I must stop again just to say that he ought to
have been called a pellegrino, not a romeo, for the three kinds
of wanderers are, Palmer, one who goes to the Holy Land; Pilgrim,
one who goes to Spain; and Romeo, one who goes to Rome.  Probably
this romeo had been to both. "He stopped at Count Raymond's
court, and was so wise and worthy (valoroso) and so won the
Count's grace, that he made him his master and guide in all
things.
..TEXT:
"Who also, maintaining himself in honest and religious
customs of life, in a little time, by his industry and good
sense, doubled the Count's revenues three times over, maintaining
always a great and honoured court. Now the Count had four
daughters, and no son; and by the sense and provision of the good
romeo --- (I can do no better than translate `procaccio'
provision, but it is only a makeshift for the word derived from
procax, meaning the general talent of prudent impudence, in
getting forward; `forwardness' has a good deal of the true sense,
only diluted;) --- well, by the sense and --- progressive
faculty, shall we say? --- of the good pilgrim, he first married
the eldest daughter, by means of money, to the good King Louis of
France, saying to the Count, `Let me alone, --- Lasciami-fare ---
and never mind the expense, for if you marry the first one well,
I 'll marry you all the others cheaper, for her relationship.'
..TEXT:
"And so it fell out, sure enough; for incontinently the
King of England (Henry III.), because he was the King of France's
relation, took the next daughter, Eleanor, for very little money
indeed; next, his natural brother, elect king of the Romans, took
the third; and, the youngest still remaining unmarried, --- says
the good romeo, `Now for this one, I will you to have a strong
man for son-in-law, who shall be thy heir;' --- and so he brought
it to pass. For finding Charles, Count of Anjou, brother of the
King Louis, he said to Raymond, `give her now to him, for his
fate is to be the best man in the world,' --- prophesying of him.
And so it was done. And after all this it came to pass, by envy
which ruins all good, that the barons of Provence became jealous
of the good romeo, and accused him to the Count of having ill-
guided his goods, and made Raymond demand account of them. Then
the good romeo said, `Count, I have served thee long, and have
put thee from little state into mighty, and for this, by false
counsel of thy people, thou art little grateful. I came into thy
court a poor romeo; I have lived honestly on thy means; now, make
to be given to me my little mule and my staff and my wallet, as I
came, and I will make thee quit of all my service.' The Count
would not he should go; but for nothing would he stay; and so he
came, and so he departed, that no one ever knew whence he had
come, nor whither he went. It was the thought of many that he was
indeed a sacred spirit."
..TEXT:
This pilgrim, you are to notice, is put by Dante in the
orb of Justice, as a just servant; the Emperor Justinian being
the image of a just ruler.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     ^Val d'Arno,~ Lect. ix. sec. 235-240.
..AUTH:
..PUBL:
..EDTR:
..ATTR:
..NOTE:
..DENT:
..BTXT:
..TCHR:
