{|PURGATORIO CANTO 01~}

	|Proemio.~ AS at the begining of his tale of Hell (^Inf.~ II, 79),
so at the
outset of his second narrative Dante invokes the aid of the
Muses,
the embodiment of poetic inspiration.  In the Letter to Can
Grande we are informed that poets frequently prefix an
invocation
to their works.  'Et hoc est eis conveniens, quia multa
invocatione
opus est eis, quum aliquid supra communem modum
hominum a superioribus substantiis petendum sit, quasi divinum
quoddam munus' (18, 308-12).  Calliope, in particular, is here
apostrophized, as in the ^Aeneid~, IX, 525:

     'Vos, o Calliope, precor aspirate canenti.'

She was probably known to Dante as the patroness of style and
rhetoric.  The mention of her name reminds the author of the
story of the daughters of Pieros, whom she defeated in song.

	The appeal to the Muses is followed by a beautiful
description
of dawn.  The journey up the mountain begins on the morning
of Easter Sunday: both hour and day are full of the promise of
hope, which is the dominant note of the ^Purgatorio.~  It will
be
remembered that the descent into Hell began on the evening of
Good Friday.  The action of the second ^cantica~ opens, then,
just
before sunrise on Sunday, April 10, 1300.

	The Island of Purgatory being in the southern hemisphere,
some of the celestial phenomena seem inverted.  As the
traveler
faces the east, for instance, he must turn to the right to
look at
the nearer, or south, pole.  Lucan, in his ^Pharsalia~,
repeatedly
touches upon the aspect of the sky over Africa; and Dante
himself, in ^Convivio~, III, v, 80-202, gives a remarkably
accurate
description of the sun's course as seen from the two poles and
the
equator.  The stars of the extreme south, however, were of
course
unknown to our poet's generation, and there his imagination
had
free scope.  He invents a constellation of four bright lights,
corresponding to the Great Bear of the north.  These
luminaries
symbolize the four cardinal virtues, -- Prudence, Temperance,
Fortitude, Justice, -- which belong to the active life and
have
existed since humanity began; whereas the three theological
virtues, -- Faith, Hope, Love, -- especially adapted to the
life of
contemplation, are distinctiveiy Christian.  Adam and Eve
before
the fall ('the first people'), dwelling at the top of the
mountain,
beheld these stars; but fallen man, inhabiting the northern
hemisphere, is bereft of their light.

	These four shining virtues illumine with sunlike
clearness the
custodian of Purgatory, the example of that Free Will which
the
souls in his domain are striving, by purification, to regain;
for
although he appears only on the shore, the whole mountain, up
to the Garden of Eden, is in his keeping.  This guardian is
Cato
the Younger, who on earth, after heroic resistance, killed
himself
in Utica rather than submit to Caesar.  His suicide was
evidently
regarded by Dante, not as a sinful revolt against God's law,
but as
a divinely bidden assertion of liberty.  Some suggestion of
this
interpretation is to be found in Lucan's ^Pharsalia~, from
which,
in the main, Dante's conception of Cato was drawn.  In
^Monarchia~,
II, v, 132-4 and 136-40 Dante says: 'Accedit et illud
inenarrabile
sacrificium severissimi verae libertatis auctoris Marci
Catonis' . . . ' ut mundo libertatis amores accenderet, quanti
libertas esset ostendit, dum e vita liber decedere maluit quam
sine libertate manere in illa.'  He continues (159-70),
quoting
from Cicero's ^De Officiis~: 'Non enim alia in causa Marcus
Cato fuit, alia caeteri qui se in Africa Caesari tradiderunt;
atque
caeteris forsitan vitio datum esset, si se interemissent,
propterea
quod levior eorum vita, et mores fuerunt faciliores.  Catoni
vero
quum incredibilem natura tribuisset gravitatem, eamque
perpetua
constantia roborasset, semperque in proposito susceptoque
permansisset, moriendum ei potius quam tyranni vultus
adspiciendus fuit.'

	As a virtuous pagan, Cato went, on dying, to the Limbus,
whence he was rescued with the patriarchs when Christ
descended
into Hell.  Then it was that souls first mounted to Purgatory;
and from that time dates Cato's ministry, which is to continue
until the Judgment Day.  How he became (or is to become) a
Christian, we are not told -- perhaps he received the faith on
his
release, having beheld Christ; but a Christian he must be on
the
day of resurrection, for Dante states that his body will then
be
glorified, like those of the other blest.  Del Lungo, in spite
of this
evidence, thinks that Cato was not saved.

	The idea of giving him this sacred charge probably came
to
Dante from a passage in the ^Aeneid~ (VIII, 670), where,
pictured on
a shield, are scenes from the other world, the wicked in one
spot,
in another the good with Cato (presumably, in Virgil's
intention,
the Elder) for a lawgiver:

     'Secretosque pios, his dantem jura Catonem.'

Cato was, however, Dante's favorite hero in antiquity, and he
would, in any case, have found a dignified place for him.  In
the
^Convivio~ and ^Monarchia~ he speaks of him with the deepest
reverence: 'quello glorioso Catone, di cui non fui di sopra
oso di
parlare' (^Conv.~, IV, vi, 95-6); 'si legge di Catone che non
a s@e
ma alla patria e a tutto il mondo nato essere credea'
(^Conv.~, IV, xxvii,
31-3).  In the ^Convivio~, IV, xxviii, 97 ff., Dante
interprets Lucan's
account of the return of Cato's wife, Marcia, to him, in her
old
age, after the death of Hortensius, as signifying the return
of the
soul to God; and he adds: 'E quale uomo terreno pi@u degno fu
di
significare Iddio, che Catone?'  Cato is, indeed, an example
of the
higher reason, or contemplation; Marcia represents the lower
reason or temporal care.  Thus man and woman are defined by
St.
Augustine in ^De Trinitate~, XII, vii-xiv.

	For the shaggy, unkempt Cato of ^Pharsalia~, II, 374-6, a
man
in the prime of life, Dante substitutes a figure all venerable
and
august, appropriate to his high office.  In the common legend
of
the Earthly Paradise two aged men appear in the Garden --
Enoch and Elijah, who were transferred from earth to Eden, to
await, in the body, the Day of Judgment.  Although Dante, in
all likelihood, believed in this myth, he wished his Garden of
Eden to be entirely suggestive of innocent youth, the
springtime
of humanity, and for that reason suppressed the inharmonious
image of the two elders, which may, however, have lurked in
his
memory and contributed to his portrait of Cato.  In the
^Voyage~
^of St. Brendan~, a tale widely current in the Middle Ages,
the
monk Barinthus reaches an island where he finds, on the shore,
'a man of great brightness,' who gives him directions, and
later,
in the interior, St. Brendan meets a youth who calls him and
his
companions by name.  These two figures -- originally, no
doubt,
identical, but differently described and occurring at the
beginning
and the end of the story -- correspond, in a way, to Dante's
Cato
and Matilda.  After imparting the required information, the
elder
in the narrative of the Irish monk suddenly vanishes; and our
Cato, contrary to the usual habit of Dante's spirits, does the
same.

	See C. Schoder, ^Sanct Brandan~ (text of the
^Peregrinatio
S. Brandani aabatis)~, 1871, pp. 4 and 3-5.  -- For Cato see
F. Cipolla, ^Intorno al Catone del Purgatorio Dantesco~, in
the
^Atti della Reale Accademia di Torino~, XXX, Dec. 9, 1894;
^I Beati e Catone~, in the ^Atti del Reale Istituto Veneto~,
LX, ii, 941 (cf. p. 81); ^Quattro Lettere intorno al Catone di
Dante~,
1898.  See also ^Publications of the Modern Language
Association
of America~, XVII, 71; ^Giorn. stor.~, LIX, 193.  Also E.
Proto,
^Nuove ricerche sul Catone dantesco~, in ^Giorn. stor.~, LIX,
193:
Cato represents freedom of the will and the highest type of
human goodness; in the ^Convivio~ he illustrates nobility in
the
various ages of man, the description being similar to that of
the
honest man in Seneca's Letter to Lucilius (cxv).  He became a
Christian, like Dante's Rhipeus, through exercise of the
four virtues.  In ^Pharsalia~, IX, 534 ff., he refuses to
consult
the oracle of Ammon:

     'Ille Deo plenus, taciti quem mente gerebat...
     Sevataque fide templi discedit ab aris.'


{|PURGATORIO CANTO 02~}

	|Proemio.~ THE souls destined to pass through Purgatory to Heaven
are
wafted across the great ocean in a swift bark directed by an
angelic pilot, even as the boatman of Hell ferries the wicked
over
Acheron.  In the ^Inferno~, III, 93, Charon referred to this
'lighter
craft' as the boat which is to carry Dante after death.  From
the
shore of the island, the two poets watch its approach, and at
first
neither can make out what is coming; all that is seen is a
bright
star on the horizon -- the shining face of the angel.  Then
the
wings appear on either side, and finally the white robe
beneath. 
Virgil is the first to recognize the stranger's heavenly
office.  The
celestial visage is too dazzling for human sight, and Dante's
eyes
are blinded, as they are subsequently by the guardian angels
of
Purgatory.  The souls in the skiff, happy and eager to begin
their
purification, are all singing together Psalm cxiv (Vulg.
cxiii),
'When Israel went out of Egypt.'  In ^Convivio~, II, i, 52-65,
Dante
uses this psalm as an example of anagogical, or spiritual,
symbolism:
thus understood, it means -- he says -- that the soul going
forth from sin becomes holy and free.  In the Letter to Can
Grande, 7, the same passage serves to illustrate all four
modes of
interpretation, and the literal, allegorical, moral, and
anagogical
significances are all explained.  As sung by the released
spirits,
the verses evidently celebrate 'the going forth of the blessed
soul
from the slavery of this corruption to the freedom of eternal
glory.'

	Among the newly arrived, Dante recognizes his friend
Casella,
the musician, and vainly tries to embrace his ethereal form. 
The
apparent tangibility or intangibility of spirits in Dante's
Hell
and Purgatory was discussed in the Argument to Canto VI of the
^Inferno~, and for the sake of convenience the commentary
there
given may be repeated here.  Throughout Hell the souls, though
without weight, are not only visible and audible, but
tangible.  On
the lower slopes of the mountain of Purgatory, however, Dante
cannot touch a shade (^Purg.~ II, 79 ff.), although two
spirits can still
embrace (^Purg.~ VI, 75); and near the summit one soul
apparently
cannot clasp another (^Purg.~ XXI, 130 ff.).  In ^Purg.~ XXV,
79 ff.,
we are informed that after death the atmosphere collects
around
the departed spirit, forming an a,erial body, which reflects
all the
emotions of the soul itself.  Although Dante nowhere says so
explicitly, it would seem that he chose to regard this airy
shape
as more substantial in proportion to its proximity to the
centre
of gravity of the universe (which is also the centre of sin),
and
more ethereal as it rises above the earth's surface.  This
conception
of the shade appears to be to a great extent Dante's own,
although
St. Thomas mentions the power of angels and devils to
assume a,erial forms, and St. Augustine says in the ^Liber de
Cognitione
Verae Vitae~, Cap. XL: 'Animae etiam defunctorum cum
viventibus apparent, corpus aerium induunt, in quo corpoream
vocem vel verba audibilia exprimunt.'

	Our poet was addicted, not only to mystery and enigma;
but
also to puzzles of all kinds, especially astronomical riddles;
and
he credited his readers with the same proclivity.  We find
many
of them in the ^Purgatorio~ and the ^Paradiso~, oftenest in
the opening
lines of a canto.  The one with which the present canto begins
is not altogether easy.  It must be understood that the
^meridian~
of any place on earth is a great circle in the sky, passing
directly
over that spot and crossing the two heavenly poles.  The
^horizon~
of a given place is a great circle in the sky, running around
the
globe 90+o~ from its meridian.  The planes of the meridian and
the
horizon are therefore always at right angles to each other;
the
horizon of the north pole, for instance, is the celestial
equator --
which is also the horizon of the south pole, because the two
poles
are 180+o~ apart.  Inasmuch as Jerusalem and Purgatory are on
opposite sides of the earth, 180+o~ from each other, they have
a
common horizon: when Jerusalem sees the sun rise, Purgatory
sees it set, and ^vice versa.~  The difference in time between
the two
places is just twelve hours, so that Jerusalem's noon is
Purgatory's
midnight, six A.M. in Jerusalem is six P.M. in Purgatory, etc.
The first three lines of the canto mean, then, that the sun,
in its
daily revolution, has descended to the horizon of Jerusalem --
'that horizon, the highest point of whose meridian is over
Jerusalem.'  But this is also the horizon of Purgatory: the
sun, which
is setting for Jerusalem, is rising for Purgatory.  Now Dante
often
speaks of ^night~ as if it were a point in the heavens
directly opposed
to the sun; so here he says that night, 'circling opposite'
the sun,
was rising for Jerusalem.  He represents it as coming forth
from
the Ganges; this river, which flowed on the eastern confines
of the
inhabited world, 90+o~ from Jerusalem, stood for the ^east~
just as the
Strait of Gibraltar (or Cadiz or Seville) stood for the
^west.~  The
sun, then, for an observer in Jerusalem, was on the western
horizon,
night was on the eastern.  In Purgatory, of course, these
conditions were reversed.  But Dante states, furthermore, that
night was rising 'with the Scales.'  The sun, from March 21 to
April 21, is in the sign of Aries; and the sign of the Zodiac
opposite
Aries is Libra: night, therefore, conceived as a point 180+o~
from the sun, may be described as being, on April 10, in
Libra,
the constellation of the Scales.  Libra remains a night
constellation
until Sept. 21, the autumnal equinox, when the sun passes
into that sign; and as Sept. 21 is the date after which the
nights
begin to grow longer than the days, Dante fancifully adds that
the
Scales in question are those which fall from the hands of
Night at
the time when she surpasses the Day.  In this devious and
ingenious
way we are told that for the spectators on the Island of
Purgatory the sun was rising.

	For the solidity of shades, see: G. Gargano-Cosenza, ^La
saldezza delle
ombre nel poema dantesco~, 1902; R. Petrosemolo, ^La saldezza
delle ombre
nella Divina Commedia~, 1902; ^Bull.~, X, 79.  Cf. St.
Augustine, ^Liber
de Spiritu et Anima~, Cap. XXIV: 'Anima est substantia
spiritualis,
simplex et indissolubilis, invisibilis et incorporea,
passibilis atque
mutabilis, carens pondere, figura et colore.'   For an
allegorical explanation
of the delay of Casella, see Adele Mondolfi in ^A Vittorio
Cian i suoi scolari
dell'Universit@a di Pisa~, 1910, p. 29; for a simpler
explanation, see
V. Cian in ^Fanfulla della Domenica~, 1911, March 5 and April
16.

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 03~}

	|Proemio.~ WHERE the circular mountain descends to the shore, a high
cliff forms its base all around; and outside this cliff creep
the souls
of those who died excommunicated but repentant.  Like the
other
classes of the 'negligent,' whom we shall meet later, they are
compelled to postpone their entrance into Purgatory until they
have
made amends for their neglect.  The contumacious spirits of
this
canto are condemned to wait thirty times as long as their
contumacy
lasted.  Dante here insists upon the doctrine that the
eternal fate of the soul depends upon its real state at the
moment
of death, and not upon the blessing or anathema of the Church. 
'By their curse' -- the curse of the clergy -- 'the eternal
love is
not irrevocably lost, so long as hope has a bit of green.' 
According
to St. Thomas, ^Summa Theologi@ae@~, Tertia, Suppl., Qu. xxi,
Art. 4,
an unjust excommunication is ineffective.  Nevertheless, their
rebellion against God's earthly vicar demands expiation, and
their humble waiting at the very foot of the mountain is a
fitting
atonement.  This penalty Dante seems to have assigned on his
own authority.

	Among the excluded is Manfred, the natural son of the
Emperor Frederick II, crowned king of Sicily in 1258. 
Handsome,
cultivated, winning, able in war and peace, he was the
idolized
chief of the Ghibellines and, like his father, the hated and
excommunicated opponent of the Papacy.  In February, 1266, on
a
plain near Benevento, he was defeated and slain by St. Louis's
brother, Charles of Anjou, to whom two Popes, Urban IV and
Clement IV, had offered the throne of Sicily.  His body was
interred on the battlefield, at the end of the Valentino
bridge, on
the right bank of the Calore; and a mound of stones was piled
over the grave.  But this land was Church property.  When
Clement heard of the burial, he sent the Archbishop of Cosenza
to cast out the corpse, and Manfred's remains were deposited,
with no funeral rites, outside the kingdom he had lost, on the
bank of the Garigliano, or 'Verde,' which formed a part of its
northern boundary.  Dante's is the earliest account we have of
this episode.  The wretched disposal of Manfred's bones is in
striking contrast to the magnificent translation of Virgil's
body, to
which reference is made in this canto.

	When Manfred has appeared to Dante, and the latter has
'modestly disclaimed' previous acquaintance with him, he
reveals
himself as the grandson of the Empress Constance, who, in
the ^Paradiso~ III, 118, is called 'la gran Costanza.' 
Daughter and
heiress of Roger II of Sicily, the last of the Norman kings,
she
married the Emperor Henry VI, the second of the Swabians,
and gave birth to Frederick II.  Manfred named his daughter
after her.  This second Constance, wedded in 1262 to Peter III
of
Aragon (cf. VII, 112 ff.), was the mother of Frederick and
James,
who became kings respectively of Sicily and Aragon.  Their
loving
grandfather here calls them 'the glory' of these kingdoms;
Dante
himself, as we learn from various passages in his works, had a
different opinion of them.  Manfred hopes that his daughter,
when she knows his state, will shorten by prayer his term of
exclusion.  The belief that the journey of repentant souls to
Heaven is hastened by the prayers of the living is an accepted
doctrine of the Church, and Dante repeatedly dwells upon it. 
Manfred's repentance and consequent salvation are probably
not of Dante's invention.  In the ^Imago Mundi~ of Jacopo da
Acqui, written only some ten or twenty years after Dante's
time,
it is recorded that Manfred saved himself by exclaiming just
before death: 'Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori!'  The
incident
as it appears in the ^Purgatorio~ is, therefore, presumably
based on
a tradition already current.  If the passage was written as
late as
1317, it has a particular significance, for in that year
another great
Ghibelline leader, Dante's patron, Can Grande della Scala, was
excommunicated by John XXII.  He remained under the ban
until his death.

	See S. De Chiara, ^Il terzo canto del 'Purgatorio' di
Dante~,
1918; M. Porena, ^La mia Lectura Dantis~, 1932, 141.
	For Dante's own opinion of Manfred's grandsons, see:
^Conv.~, IV, vi,
182-3 ; ^Vulg. El.~, I, xii, 35-7; ^Purg.~ VII, 119-20; ^Par.~
XIX, 130-4;
^Par.~ XX, 63.  For Manfred and his salvation: E. Gorra, ^Fra
drammi e
poemi~, 1900, ^Per la genesi della Divina Commedia~, p. 155;
F. Novati
^Indagini e postille dantesche~, Serie prima, 1899, ^Come
Manfredi s'@e
salvato.~  For the doctrine of prayers for the dead: 2 Macc.
xii, 46; St.
Thomas, ^Summa Theologiae~, Tertia, Suppl., Qu. lxxi, Art. 2
and 6.  For
the excommunication of Can Grande, C. Cipolla, ^Lettere di
Giovanni
XXII riguardanti Verona e gli Scaligeri~, 1909 (cf. E. G.
Parodi in ^Il
Marzocco~, Apr. 10, 1910).  For Frederick III of Sicily, see
F. Torraca,
^Nuovi Studi danteschi~, 204.  For James II of Aragon, see the
same work,
181.

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 04~}

	|Proemio.~ THE top of the cliff can be reached only by crawling up
through
a crack in the rock, so narrow that it crowds the climbers on
either
side.  Above is an open slope, difficult of ascent.  On this
declivity,
lazily reclining in the shade of a boulder, are the shades of
the
'negligent' of the second class -- those who postponed
repentance
through indolence.  They must wait outside of Purgatory
for a period equal to their life on earth.  Among them is the
mocking,
humorous Florentine called Belacqua, evidently a friend of
our poet, and, according to the early commentators, a maker
of musical instruments.  His real name was probably Duccio di
Bonavia.  He first betrays his presence by his amusement at
Dante's naive surprise on seeing the sun at the left, or
north, as
he faces east.  As the sun's course is confined within the
tropics,
it is always south of the north temperate, and north of the
south
temperate zone.  The European observer, in the middle of the
morning, sees the sun in the southeast; Dante now beholds it
in
the northeast.  Something similar was noted by Lucan in his
^Pharsalia~, III, 247-8 and IX, 538-9:

     'Ignotum vobis, Arabes, venistis in orbem,
     Umbras mirati nemorum non ire sinistras.'
     'At tibi, quaecumque es Libyco gens igne diremta,
     In Noton umbra cadit, quae nobis exit in Arcton.'
     
In the opening lines of this canto Dante discusses a
psychological
phenomenon to which he reverts more than once.  The
attention, he says, can be so monopolized by one of the senses
that the mind is dead to all other perceptions.  According to
the
Aristotelian philosophy, 'l'anima principalmente,' he tells us
in
^Conv.~, III, ii, 85-6, 'ha tre potenze, cio@e vivere,
sentire, e ragionare.' 
Compare ^Vulg. El.~, II, ii, 46-55.  These three powers --
often called souls -- are the vegetative, the sensitive, and
the
intellective.  The vegetative power, possessed by all plants
and
animals, is simply life.  Above it is the sensitive, or power
of feeling,
which belongs to animals.  'E questa sensitiva potenza @e
fondamento
della intellettiva, cio@e della ragione' (l. c., 105-7), which
is peculiar to man.  How these powers are genetically related
to
one another is explained in ^Purg.~ XXV, 52-75, 'Quella anima
che tutte queste potenze comprende,' adds Dante in ^Conv.~,
III,
i, 112-4, -- meaning the soul of man, -- ' @e perfettissima di
tutte
l' altre.'  The intellective power is, of course, the highest. 
Moreover
(l. c., 122-3), 'in questa nobilissima parte dell'Anima sono
pi@u virt@u' -- there are several faculties, namely,
knowledge,
reason, judgment, etc.  When the soul is all absorbed in the
operation of one of the senses, no impressions can reach it
from
another sense; and, furthermore, the intellective power is
then held
in check, so that reason and judgment are inactive.  On the
other
hand, the soul may be so engrossed by intellectual activity
that
the senses are dormant.  An example of the former kind of
absorption
is given in ^Conv.~, II, xiv, 187-93: 'Ancora la Musica trae a
s@e gli spiriti umani (che sono quasi principalmente vapori
del
cuore), sicch@e quasi cessano da ogni operazione, -- s@i @e l'
anima
intera quando l' ode, -- e la virt@u di tutti quasi corre allo
spirito
sensibile che riceve il suono.'  The 'spirits' are the senses,
which
were thought of as fine vapors.  The activity of all the other
senses, then, is transferred to the sense of hearing.  'S@i @e
l'anima
intera' seems to mean: 'the soul is so undisturbed' by any
other
faculty or power.  The phrase 'l'anima intera' recurs in our
canto,
line 11.
	For the doctrine of attention, see St. Thomas, ^Summa
Theologiae~,
Prima Secundae, Cu. xxxvii, Art. 1.

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 05~}

	|Proemio.~ THE  third class of the 'negligent' comprises those who,
cut
short by a violent death, repented at their last gasp.  They
come
wandering horizontally across the mountain-side.  Their
principal
spokesman is Count Buonconte da Montefeltro, a Ghibelline
leader, captain of the Aretines in the disastrous battle of
Campaldino in 1289.  There he met his death, but, as we are
told by
Dante (who almost certainly took part in this fight), his body
was
not found on the field.  This curious circumstance allows the
poet
to introduce a romantic account of Buonconte's end -- his
appeal
to Mary with his dying breath, his salvation 'by one little
tear'
of genuine contrition, and the contest between angel and demon
for
the possession of his soul.  Such a conflict we find portrayed
in
ancient Etruscan art, and, in Christian times, described as
early
as Gregory I and Bede.  In the ^Commedia~ it occurs -- with a
different outcome -- in only one other instance, that of
Buonconte's
father, Guido (^Inf.~ XXVII, 112-29), whose fate is thus
contrasted with his son's.  By means of these two extreme
examples Dante illustrates the dependence of everlasting
welfare
or perdition upon the real fitness of the soul at the instant
of
departure.

	The foiled devil wreaks his vengeance on the corpse.  He
conjures up a storm, and Buonconte's body is swept into the
Arno.  
In Ephesians ii, 2, the fiend is called 'prince of the power
of the
air.'  According to St. Thomas, the elements are subject to
spiritual
beings; and demons, who dwell partly in Hell and partly in
the dark air, are able to produce wind and rain.

	For Guido da Montefeltro, see Argument to ^Inf.~ XXVII. 
For the
contest between angel and devil: Gregory I, ^Dialogi~, IV,
xxxvi (Migne,
LVII, 381); Bede, ^Historia Ecclesiastica~, III, xix (Migne,
XCV, 146 ff.). 
For the nature and power of demons: St. Thomas, ^Summa
Theologiae~,
Prima, Qu. lxiv, Art. 4; Prima, Qu. cxii, Art. 2; Prima
Secundae, Qu.
lxxx Art. 2.

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 06~}

	|Proemio.~ THE leading personage of this canto is that 'Lombard
soul' who
so fired the imagination of two great poets.  Browning saw in
Sordello the representative of a changing age, an infinitely
varied
and interesting civilization; in Dante's eyes he was the
critic of
corrupt and incompetent government.  The real Sordello was one
of those roving Italians who, in the 13th century, helped to
"maintain the waning glory of Proven$cal verse, and profited
by its
immense vogue in foreign countries.  Born in the Mantuan town
of
Goito, he lived the restless and sometimes scandalous life of
a
handsome adventurer and clever poet at various courts in
Lombardy
and Piedmont, then in France and Spain, and found at last
a mighty protector in the Count of Provence.  Passing into the
service of the count's son-in-law, Charles of Anjou, he
probably
saw the Sicilian campaign and the battle of Benevento.  By
this
time he was certainly a man of considerable importance. 
Charles,
after a reproof from Pope Clement IV for his neglect of the
poet,
bestowed upon him some castles in the Abruzzi.  Sordello had
evidently risen to knighthood, and we may assume that the
notoriety of his youthful career was overshadowed by the fame
of his later years.  Dante, in ^De Vulgari Eloquentia~, I, xv,
9-14,
describes him as a man of great eloquence who had renounced
his
native dialect not only in poetry but in speech.  His lyric
work,
as we possess it, does not rise above mediocrity; but his
^Ensenhamen
d'Onor~, a long didactic poem, though not brilliant in style,
contains much that surely appealed to Dante -- a high standard
of chivalrous conduct and a vigorous invective against the
mean-spirited
rich.  Dante's conception of him, however, was obviously
based, in the main, upon a single short piece of verse, a
lament
over the death of Blacatz, a Proven$cal patron of letters;
Sordello
compares the virtues of the departed with the vices and
weaknesses of those that are left, and turns his elegy into
scathing
satire, fearless and merciless condemnation of the potentates
of
his time, from the Emperor down.  Dante regards him, then, as
the type of the unflinching patriot and reformer, the scourge
of
kings.  He invests his figure with more than regal dignity. 
It is
likely that he knew but little of the real Sordello.  He puts
into the
figure much of himself, as he did with Statius.  Though a
member
of the fourth class of the 'negligent' (those whose minds were
over-engrossed
by public cares), Sordello sits 'all alone,' apart from the
monarchs whom he judged.  The instant kindling of the flame of
love by the mere mention of his native Mantua, -- contrasted
as it
is with the majestic indifference of his first attitude, and
rendered
the more effective by the amazing swiftness of the action, --
leads
up naturally to the apostrophe to Italy which concludes the
canto,
a denunciation that vents all the pent-up bitterness of the
exile's
heart.  Its savage irony recalls the poem and the letter
addressed
by Guittone d'Arezzo to the Florentines on the morrow of their
great defeat at Montaperti.  For many centuries it bore a
stern
message to Italians.

	See W. Clyde De Vane in ^Studies in Philology~, XXVII, 1;
V.
Crescini, ^A proposito di Sordello~ in ^Atti del Reale
Istituto Veneto di scienze,
lettere ed arti~, LXV, ii; E. G. Parodi in ^Bull.~, IV, 185;
Novati, 143. 
For Sordello's life and works, see C. De Lollis, ^Vita e
poesie di Sordello
di Goito~, 1896.  See also E. Ercole in ^Nuovo Giornale
dantesco~, III, 113,
who sees in Dante's treatment of Sordello an argument for
assigning
the composition of the ^Purgatorio~ to the period 1308-10. --
For patriotic
Italian invective, cf. the famous ^canzoni~, ^Italia mia~, by
Petrarch and
Leopardi, and Filicaia's sonnet, ^Italia~, ^Italia.~

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 07~}

	|Proemio.~ 'WALK while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon
you:
for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth'
(John xii, 35).  In ll. 107-8 of the first canto the wayfarers
were
told that the sun -- the emblem of spiritual enlightenment, or
righteous choice -- was to be their guide in their upward
journey;
now (and again in XVII, 62-3 and XXVII, 74-5) they learn that
without that guidance they cannot ascend at all.  The life of
the
penitent is divided between the day of active advancement on
the
path of reformation, where every step must be wisely directed,
and the night of prayerful meditation.  Day is ushered in by
the
constellation of cardinal, or practical, virtues, Prudence,
Temperance,
Fortitude, Justice (I, 22-7); night, by the three bright stars
of Christian contemplation, the theological virtues of Faith,
Hope, and Love (VIII, 85-93).

	Each of the three nights passed by Dante on the island is
spent
in repose.  His first resting-place is the beautiful Valley of
the
Princes, a hollow in the mountain-side, where are gathered
great
rulers whose worldly cares made them postpone until the last
moment their reconciliation with God.  Those who were enemies
on earth sit side by side in fraternal harmony, Rudolph of
Hapsburg with Ottocar of Bohemia, Charles of Anjou with Peter
of
Aragon.  Here, as in the first life, Sordello is the judge of
kings:
he points out and describes to the travelers the dwellers in
the
dale.  The conception of this charming, peaceful spot was
probably
suggested to Dante -- as was that of the Noble Castle of
^Inf.~ IV, 106 -- by Virgil's picture of the Elysian Fields in
^Aen.~,
VI, 637 ff.  As Sordello shows the dell to Virgil and Dante
from
a bank, so Anchises leads the Sibyl and Aeneas to a height
(754-5):

     'Et tumulum capit, unde omnes longo ordine possit
     Adversos legere, et venientum discere vultus.'

In both poems the spirits are seen reclining on the
greensward,
singing together (656-7):

     'Conspicit ecce alios dextra laevaque per herbam
     Vescentes, laetumque choro paeana canentes.'

Like Sordello, Anchises surveys and recognizes souls destined
to
rise (679-81):

     'At pater Anchises penitus convalle virenti
     Inclusas animas, superumque ad lumen ituras,
     Lustrabat studio recolens.'

One may compare also Lucian's Isle of the Blest in the ^True
History~, II.

	There is a correspondence between the Nobile Castello and
the Valle,
representing respectively nobility of mind and of birth: see
F. Bartoli
in ^Rivista d'Italia~, XXIII, 312.  Dante, we may be sure,
aspired to both
distinctions, aristocracy of intellect and of family.

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 08~}

	|Proemio.~ THE penitent who, completely renouncing his past life,
has once
begun his expiation under the protection of grace and the
guidance of
the Church is exempt from temptation or fear of sin; so
the souls within Dante's Purgatory have no apprehension. 
Those
outside the gate, however, -- the remorseful evildoers who are
still waiting and striving, -- are exposed to the wiles of the
serpent
and feel the 'chaste dread' (^timor castus)~ of wickedness
itself
different from the 'servile terror' (^timor servilis)~ of the
consequences
of wrongdoing (cf. ^Inf.~ I, 44).  But inasmuch as they are
on their way to God, he constantly watches over them; in time
of
need he sends the green Angels of Hope, armed with the blunted
sword of defence, to protect them from the adversary.  Such is
the lesson which Dante expressly bids us discover behind the
'thin veil' of allegory.  Once before, in ^Inf.~ IX, 61-3, he
warned
us to look 'under the veil of the strange verses.'

	It is in the evening that temptation creeps upon the
repentant
sinner -- evening, which softens the hearts of sailors just
parted
from home, and 'pricks with love' the unhardened traveler as
he
hears the bell of compline, or ^compieta~, tolling the knell
of 'dying
day.'  That is the hour at which the Church sings the hymn
(attributed to St. Ambrose), ^Te lucis ante~, and recites a
prayer
calling for the guardianship of holy angels and protection
against
the snares of the enemy.  This hymn is not sung by the souls
in
the valley.  The first two of the three stanzas are as
follows:

     'Te lucis ante terminum       Procul recedant somnia
     Rerum Creator, poscimus,      Et noctium phantasmata;
     Ut tua pro clementia          Hostemque nostrum comprime,
     Sis praesul et custodia     Ne polluantur corpora.'

Among the singers, two are singled out for special notice:
one,
Nino Visconti, was known to Dante in the first life; the
other,
Conrad Malaspina, belonged to a family whose hospitality the
poet once enjoyed.  Nino, a grandson of the Ugolino of ^Inf.~
XXXIII, was judge, or governor, of Gallura, one of the four
provinces
into which the Pisans divided their Sardinian domain;
Fra Gomita (^Inf.~ XXII, 81) was his dishonest vicar there. 
Moreover,
he ruled Pisa with his grandfather, and on the death of the
latter waged war for five years --1288-93 -- against that city
and the Ghibelline forces of Guido da Montefeltro (^Inf.~
XXVII). 
He was an ally of Florence -- to which he made several visits
in
1289 -- and other Guelf towns of Tuscany, and became captain
general of the Guelf league.  We learn from ^Inf.~ XXI, 94-6,
that
Dante had a hand in one of his campaigns, being present at the
siege of Caprona in 1289.  Although Nino's life was devoted
mainly to politics and strife, he seems to have been fond of
poetry. 
He lived until 1296.  Conrad Malaspina, who died two years
earlier, was the lord of Villafranca on the Magra (which flows
into
the sea near the Gulf of Spezia) and other holdings in the
northwest. 
For a century his house had been famous for its gallantry
and its liberality to troubadours; and 'the glory of the purse
and
the sword' had not declined.  In October, 1306, Dante acted as
attorney for the family in concluding a treaty of peace.  One
of
the letters ascribed to him (Epistola III) is addressed to
Moroello
Malaspina, his former host, to whom obscure reference is made
in
^Inf.~ XXIV, 145-50.  The poet's splendid tribute of just
praise is a
grateful return for kindness to the exile.

	For the odd figure of the ^chiodi~, at the close of the
canto, see H.
D. Austin, ^Di alcune metafore controverse nell' opera di
Dante~, 1932,
139.

{|PURGATORIO CANOT 09~}

	|Proemio.~ DURING each of the three nights that Dante spends on the
island
he has an allegorical vision, related to his present state or
his
immediate future.  In the first dream he fancies himself
carried
up through the sky by a golden eagle; and this flight is but
the
image of a real spiritual ascent.  Souls earnestly striving to
reach
God are always mysteriously assisted by grace, which comes to
meet them and so speeds them on their way that their swift
progress passes their understanding.  'They that wait upon the
Lord,' says Isaiah xl, 31, 'shall renew their strength; they
shall
mount up with wings as eagles.'

	Lucia, then, the symbol of Illuminating Grace, who came
to
Dante's assistance at the beginning of his struggle (^Inf.~
II, 97-108)
and who reappears to him at his long journey's end (^Par.~
XXXII, 137), now lifts him up while he is asleep and bears
him,
just at daybreak, over the long, steep incline up to the very
gate of Purgatory.

	There he beholds, seated on the steps, an angelic
guardian,
who represents Ecclesiastical Authority.  In the hand of this
celestial 'porter,' reflecting the sun's rays, gleams a bare
sword,
'the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God' (Ephesians
vi, 17).

	From beneath his garment he draws the keys entrusted by
Christ
to Peter and his successors -- 'I will give unto thee the keys
of the
kingdom of heaven' (Mat. xvi, 19).  They are two, the golden
key of power and the silver key of discernment; or, as Peter
Lombard
describes them in his ^Sententiae~, IV, xviii, 502, 'scientia
discernendi peccata et potestas judicandi de peccatis.'  The
priest
needs not only the requisite authority to loose and bind
delegated
to him by God, but also must have judgment to direct him
in the use of it.  The golden key, which was purchased with
Christ's blood, is 'the more precious'; but the other, the
silver
key of discrimination, 'requires vast skill and wit' to
'disentangle the knot.'

	The stone threshold of Purgatory which is the angel's
seat
appears to Dante to be made of adamant; it evidently typifies
the firm foundation upon which ecclesiastical power rests --
'thou
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church' (Mat.
xvi,
18).

	Leading up to it are three steps: the first is of white,
smooth
marble; the second, of rough, dark stone, scorched and
cracked;
the third, 'piled upon' the second, is blood-red.  Apparently
they stand for the three stages in the career of man which led
up to the founding of the Church: original innocence, sin, and
atonement.  It is obvious that the same three stages are bound
to
recur in the life of every transgressor who finds salvation. 
The
feet of the gatekeeper rest upon the red step of atonement;
there it is that Dante humbly prostrates himself and beats his
breast.

	Most commentators see in the three stairs the three parts
of
the sacrament of penance -- contrition, confession,
satisfaction. 
But according to the literal sense of the poem the souls who
have
reached the gate should have accomplished these duties (for
the
most part at least) before death; otherwise they would not
have
attained the mountain at all.  And in Dante's symbolical
journey
through Purgatory (indicating the purification of his
soul as a result of discipline on earth) he is not yet ready
to
receive this sacrament, which forms the culmination of his
expiatory task.  Contrition, confession, and satisfaction
await him
upon his arrival at the top of the mountain, where they are
administered by Beatrice herself: ^Purg.~ XXX, 97-9; XXXI,
1-36, 88-90.

	For still different explanations of the steps, see Flam.,
II, 101;
Torraca, 395.  For the keys, see St. Thomas, ^Summa
Theologiae~, Tertia, Suppl., Qu. xvii, Art. 3. -- Cf.
^Romania~, XXXIX, 582-3.  In the vision of Mechthild of
Hackeborn, there are, leading up to an altar, three steps of
different colors and of allegorical significance: Gardner,
292.

{|PURGATORIO CANTO 10~}

	|Proemio.~ PURGATORY proper consists of seven flat, narrow terraces
running around the mountain and separated from one another by
steep cliffs.  On each shelf are souls doing penance for one
of the
capital vices -- pride, envy, anger, sloth, avarice and
prodigality
gluttony, lust.  These wicked dispositions are the source of
all sin. 
Inasmuch as pride is an ingredient in every transgression
(which
is an assumption of superiority to law), all souls have to
suffer in
the first circle; in the ensuing circles they are punished
according
to the nature of their wrongdoing.  The terraces are connected
by
stairways cut into the precipice.  When a spirit has cleansed
itself
of the evil that is expiated on one shelf, it passes on upward
to the
next terrace that claims it -- or, if it has no other stain,
to the
top of the mountain.  At the beginning of each ascent a
friendly
angel is seen, who removes the last impress of the discarded
vice;
and a beatitude (Mat. v, 3-8) is heard, appropriate to the
circle
that is left below.  To sustain them, the souls are furnished,
on
every terrace, with examples of the particular sin that
belongs
to that spot, and of the opposite virtue.  The latter examples
--
the 'goad' -- generally appear to Dante as he enters each
circle,
the former -- the 'check' -- as he is about to depart from it. 
They take different shapes on the various shelves; on the
first,
they present themselves to the eye as beautiful carvings on
the
upright wall of the mountain and on the floor.  These
illustrations
of good and evil are drawn from both Christian and pagan lore,
but the first example of each of the seven virtues is taken
from the
life of the Virgin.  In the ^Speculum Beatae Maria Virginis~
by Friar
Conrad of Saxony, a Franciscan contemporary of St.
Bonaventure,
the Virtues of the Virgin are opposed to the seven vices:
Gardner,
254-5.

	Allegorically the torments cheerfully endured on the
several
terraces represent the forms of discipline to which the sinner
must
subject himself, under priestly direction, in order to restore
his
lost innocence and thus fit himself for Heaven.  In the first
circle
for instance, the spirits crouching under heavy burdens are
the
image of self-imposed humiliation, the painful subjugation of
pride.  Dante's journey up through Purgatory signifies the
moral
training by means of which, obedient to ecclesiastical
authority
he removes from his soul every disposition to evil and regains
the purity of heart that enables him to see God.  While in the
literal sense of the poem he is only an observer of the
spirits and
their punishments, symbolically he is himself the punished
spirit;
in the circles of pride, envy, anger, and lust, -- if we look
for the
inner beneath the external meaning, -- we can see the poet in
the
throes of penance.

	For the carvings, see H. D. Austin, ^The Arrangement of
Dante's
Purgatorial Reliefs~ in ^Publications of the Modern Language
Association of America~, XVII, 1.
