.sh 1 "Future Effort"
.pp
The Dartmouth Dante Project is a work in progress.
Our efforts are directed toward meeting the original
goals of the original project and at pursuing some promising new
technology.
.pp
Most important is completing the loading of the commentaries.
The project plan includes 60 commentaries,
which are listed in the Appendix.
They are presently at various stages of processing:
.(b L
.(c
13	Edited
11	Being edited
 7	Ready to edit
11	Entered
14	Ready to enter
 4	Being prepared for entry
.)c
.)b
The most difficult and expensive part of this process is editing
the commentary texts.
.pp
The major computer programming task remaining for the project is the
design and implementation of a specialized user interface for the
database.
The current interface is derived from a general-purpose interface;
the custom interface will take full advantage of the underlying
structure of the DDP database.
It will support a query language that makes it as easy as possible
for a researcher to search this particular database,
and it will present results in the most concise and useful format.
.pp
The database will be available for general use in October, 1988,
with 24 commentaries loaded.
When the database opens, we will
provide complete user documentation and administrative
support for researchers and students.
We will also collect all comments both about the database's user
interface and about the commentary texts.
We expect to have completed loading of all 64 commentaries by 1991.
.pp
The user interface will be an evolving program, but the commentary
texts will not be altered during the initial usage phase of the database.
After the database has been generally available for some time, we
will review all the editorial and scholarly comments about the
commentaries and then apply any needed changes to the texts.
.pp
One of the most exciting advances in computer technology today is
the development of laser disk storage devices.
These devices make it technologically possible for an
institution or even an individual to purchase a desktop computer
that contains the complete DDP database and user interface program.
The BRS text retrieval database used by the DDP is available today
for desktop microcomputers,
and the cost of producing laser disks is dropping every year.
Exactly how many commentaries would be available in this manner
depends on copyright arrangements, but at least the earlier,
uncopyrighted commentaries, which comprise at least 2/3 of the
database, would be included.
.sh 2 Summary
.pp
The Dartmouth Dante Project, a work in progress, is collecting,
editing, and making available to students and scholars a substantial
number of the commentaries written through the centuries about
Dante's monumental DC.
Through the use of sophisticated text storage and retrieval software
and emerging laser disk storage technology, the project will make
this collection of historic documents available to scholars
everywhere.
