.sh 1 "Project Overview"
.pp
The Dartmouth Dante Project is collecting a substantial number of
commentaries on Dante's DC
and entering them into a computerized text retrieval database system.
The design of the database, its use, and the processing of the
commentary texts are the subject of this paper.
The paper assumes
little or no knowledge of the DC and only a basic familiarity with
computerized text manipulation.
.sh 2 "Project Goals"
.pp
The Dartmouth Dante Project (DDP) has two primary goals:
making the commentaries on the DC easily available to a much wider community
of scholars than is currently possible,
and applying the speed and power of computerized text searching to
make research less tedious and more productive.
.pp
In the past a student or scholar could study a significant number of these
commentaries only by traveling to several of the research
libraries with major collections.
The DDP will now make it possible for a researcher with equipment as
simple as a computer terminal and a telephone to have these
commentaries immediately available, no matter where he or she is
working.
.pp
Even if the scholar visited the libraries with large
Dante collections and had a number of commentary texts before him,
the sheer volume of material makes it laborious if not impossible to trace
a phrase, idea, or concept through the centuries of scholarship
contained in the commentaries.
However, with the speed of the DDP database system enabling it to perform
sophisticated searches through millions of words of text in a matter
of a few seconds,
not only is much of the drudgery of research eliminated, but the
student or scholar is likely to discover unexpected results --
information that would have been missed in a manual search of the
texts.
.sh 2 "History of the Project"
.pp
The Dartmouth Dante Project had its beginnings in the summer of 1982
at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire.
Professor Robert Hollander of Princeton University and three of his
colleagues from Dartmouth, Kevin Brownlee, Stephen Nichols, and
Nancy Vickers, noted that although Dartmouth College was a leading
institution in areas such as incorporating computer technology into the
undergraduate curriculum, its holdings of commentaries on the
DC were weak.
These
.i dantisti
decided to apply the strength to the weakness, and they approached the
college's then Director of Academic Computing, Raymond Neff, with the
idea of a computerized collection of commentaries.
With initial funding from the college and from the Dante Society of America,
and with a major grant from
the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Dartmouth Dante
Project was launched.
It has since also been supported by Princeton University,
the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, and by gifts in kind from
Digital Equipment Corporation.
.pp
In the last few years the project has added to its staff 
additional scholars, Margherita Frankel and Antonia Rossi, to act as editors;
as well as a computer programmer, the author;
a group of student assistants to do data entry; and a fulltime
project administrator, Janet Stephens and then Jonathan Altman.
.pp
An offshoot of the project is the forthcoming publication by the
University Press of New England of the project's newly edited text
of the commentary by Bernardino Daniello.
The project's editors added documentation to Daniello's biblical and
secular citations and produced a computer-generated index of citations.
