.sh 1 "Document Processing"
.pp
This section describes the processing of commentary text from
the original manuscripts to the DDP database.
The processing consists of data entry, pre-edit text
processing, editing, pre-load text processing, and database loading.
.sh 2 "Data Entry"
.pp
The printed commentaries on the DC range in age from a few years to hundreds
of years, and several older ones are not available in modern
editions.
The texts have been collected from a variety of sources, mainly
research libraries, where they were photocopied for entry at Dartmouth.
Most have been entered 
by being read by an optical character scanner.
Some -- mostly older printings -- could not be scanned
and were typed in at a computer terminal.
.pp
The DDP uses an optical character scanner called a Kurzweil
Data Entry Machine, or KDEM.
The KDEM resembles a photocopier; there is a glass surface
on which the manuscript pages are placed.
Instead of producing a printed reproduction of the page, the KDEM scans
the text line by line and converts it into a computer file of
standard ASCII characters.
The KDEM is programmed with pattern-recognition algorithms
that can recognize characters in different, often poor-quality print faces.
.pp
During a phase of the data entry process called \*(lqtraining,\*(rq the
operator places samples of the text to be scanned on the machine and
then corrects the machine's initial guesses about what
characters its scanner sees.
A skilled operator can train the machine to recognize correctly almost 100% of
the characters scanned; the exact percentage depends on the
quality of the original print.
.pp
After training the machine, which typically takes
from several minutes to several
hours, scanning of the manuscript begins.
After a page is scanned, the machine displays the
text it has read on its console,
and the operator compares this to the original,
making any needed corrections before the text file is stored.
.pp
When a sufficiently large volume of text has been scanned, 
checked, and stored on the KDEM, it is transferred to our Unix\*#
minicomputer.
.(d
\*# Unix is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories.
.)d
This can be done by writing a 9-track tape on the KDEM or by a
direct communications channel between the two machines.
.pp
About one third of the commentary manuscripts could not be scanned
with a high enough accuracy to justify the time required.
These manuscripts have been typed directly into computer files using
conventional text editors.
All typists follow stylistic norms that produce text in a format
close enough to that produced by the KDEM that it can be processed
just as if it had been scanned.
.sh 2 "Pre-Edit Processing"
.pp
Raw commentary text is processed before being sent to the
Dante scholars who will edit it.
This processing is done on the same minicomputer on which the
final database resides.
The computer is a Digital Equipment Corporation VAX 11/785.
It runs the 4.3 Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) of the
Unix operating system.
The computer is used at Dartmouth for general academic computing
as well as for the DDP.
We have found the Unix operating system to be particularly well
suited to the project.
Aside from the fact that our database manager program is Unix-based,
the system is rich in utilities for text processing.
Very little programming has been necessary in the project;
most functions have been performed by combining Unix utilities
through the mechanism of shell scripts.
.pp
Pre-edit processing eliminates some of the peculiarities of scanned
text and produces a good \*(lqrough draft\*(rq format that the editors can
handle easily.
Scanned text often has hyphenated words at the ends of
lines;
pre-edit processing eliminates these and adjusts line length for
convenient screen editing.
The scanner sometimes inserts blanks in places where they should not
be, such as immediately before a comma.
This condition is corrected.
Similarly, multiple blank lines are collapsed to a single line.
Finally, the pre-editing script allows an operator to check the rough text
with a screen editor to catch any problems that the automatic
procedures miss.
.pp
The pre-edit processing produces files of commentary text that are
ready for scholarly editing.
The files usually contain all of a commentary's text on
a particular CANTO of the poem.
They typically contain anywhere from 50 to 500 lines of text, with an
average of about 200.
.sh 2 "Editing"
.pp
DDP editors are fluent in the language in which the commentary is
written, and are also recognized Dante scholars.
Their function is to recheck the accuracy of the commentary
text, to ensure uniform citation formats, and to make minor
corrections in the text.
This process is time-consuming, and the editors are widely disbursed
geographically.
For these reasons, the editors use personal microcomputers in their
homes or offices.
The computers are Digital Equipment Corporation Rainbows\*#.
.(d
\*# Rainbow is a trademark of Digital Equipment Corporation.
.)d
They run the MS-DOS\*# operating system,
.(d
\*# MS-DOS is a trademark of Microsoft, Inc.
.)d
and the DDP editors use the FinalWord\*# word processing program.
.(d
\*# FinalWord is a trademark of Mark of the Unicorn, Inc.
.)d
This word processor was chosen in part because it can process the
European characters that the Rainbow can display.
.pp
Commentary text files are transferred from the Unix computer to the
editors' Rainbows either by mailing floppy disks or by a direct
communications link between the Unix machine and the Rainbow.
This direct link uses a communications program called MLINK\*# that provides
error-free transmission of text files between computers.
.(d
\*# MLINK is a trademark of Corporate Microsystems, Inc.
.)d
When the editors have completed a group of files, the edited text
is transferred back to the Unix machine using the same techniques.
Both the downloading from Unix to Rainbow and the uploading from
Rainbow to Unix are done with semi-automatic procedures 
that handle details such as file name changes, character
translation, and logging.
.sh 2 "Database Loading"
.pp
Commentary text files returned by the editors are essentially in
their final form, and are ready to be loaded into the database.
Our database manager is a commercial product called BRS/Search\*#.
.(d
\*# BRS/Search is a trademark of BRS Information Technologies.
.)d
It is a large set of programs that provide sophisticated indexing,
storage, and retrieval of text.
.pp
Edited commentary text is prepared for loading into the database by adding
the database paragraph labels and identification information such as
publication date, CANTO number, and poem line number.
Pre-load processing on the Unix computer provides this information
and runs the results through a verification program that is part of
the BRS system.
The verification program is a final check that all necessary data
is supplied and in the proper format.
.pp
The final stage is running the database loader program.
It is this BRS program which builds the database index and text
files.
The loader allow incremental loading: the database can be
built up in small pieces by adding to the existing files.
It is our practise, however, to load an entire commentary as a unit.
This makes it easier to keep track of what has been loaded and also
guarantees that the text of a given commentary will be displayed
in the proper order.
.pp
After each commentary is added to the database, we make archive
copies of all the database files.
This makes it relatively easy to \*(lqback out\*(rq a commentary if it
becomes necessary to reload it for any reason.
