
  1



 The Dartmouth Dante Project


 Stephen Campbell

 Dartmouth College


 and


 Robert Hollander

 Princeton University



Dartmouth Dante Project


  2



 ABSTRACT



 The Dartmouth Dante Project is collecting a substantial number of com-

 mentaries on Dante's Divina Commedia and entering them into a computer-

 ized text retrieval database system. The design of the database, its use, and

 the processing of the commentary texts, are the subject of this paper. The

 paper assumes little or no knowledge of the Divina Commedia and only a

 basic familiarity with computerized text manipulation.



Dartmouth Dante Project


  3


 1. Project Overview  


 The Dartmouth Dante Project is collecting a substantial number of

 commentaries on Dante's Divina Commedia and entering them into a com-

 puterized text retrieval database system. The design of the database, its

 use, and the processing of the commentary texts are the subject of this

 paper. The paper assumes little or no knowledge of the Divina Commedia

 and only a basic familiarity with computerized text manipulation.


 1.1. Project Goals  


 The Dartmouth Dante Project (DDP) has two primary goals: making

 the commentaries on the Divina Commedia easily available to a much wider

 community of scholars than is currently possible, and applying the speed

 and power of computerized text searching to make research less tedious and

 more productive.


 In the past a student or scholar could study a significant number of

 these commentaries only by traveling to several of the research libraries

 with major collections. The DDP will now make it possible for a researcher

 with equipment as simple as a computer terminal and a telephone to have

 these commentaries immediately available, no matter where he or she is

 working.


 Even if the scholar visited the libraries with large Dante collections

 and had a number of commentary texts before him, the sheer volume of

 material makes it laborious if not impossible to trace a phrase, idea, or con-

 cept through the centuries of scholarship contained in the commentaries.

 However, with the speed of the DDP database system enabling it to per-

 form sophisticated searches through millions of words of text in a matter

 of a few seconds, not only is much of the drudgery of research eliminated,

 but the student or scholar is likely to discover unexpected results --

Dartmouth Dante Project


  4


 information that would have been missed in a manual search of the texts.


 1.2. History of the Project  


 The Dartmouth Dante Project had its beginnings in the summer of

 1982 at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire. Professor Robert

 Hollander of Princeton University and three of his colleagues from Dart-

 mouth, Kevin Brownlee, Stephen Nichols, and Nancy Vickers, noted that

 although Dartmouth College was a leading institution in areas such as

 incorporating computer technology into the undergraduate curriculum, its

 holdings of commentaries on the Divina Commedia were weak. These dan-

 tisti decided to apply the strength to the weakness, and they approached

 the college's then Director of Academic Computing, Raymond Neff, with

 the idea of a computerized collection of commentaries. With initial funding

 from the college and from the Dante Society of America, and with a major

 grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Dartmouth

 Dante Project was launched. It has since also been supported by Princeton

 University, the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, and by gifts in kind

 from Digital Equipment Corporation.


 In the last few years the project has added to its staff additional scho-

 lars, Margherita Frankel and Antonia Rossi, to act as editors; as well as a

 computer programmer, the author; a group of student assistants to do data

 entry; and a fulltime project administrator, Janet Stephens and then

 Jonathan Altman.


 An offshoot of the project is the forthcoming publication by the

 University Press of New England of the project's newly edited text of the

 commentary by Bernardino Daniello. The project's editors added documen-

 tation to Daniello's biblical and secular citations and produced a

 computer-generated index of citations.

Dartmouth Dante Project


  5


 2. Database Design  


 The Dartmouth Dante Project will load the entire text of 60 commen-

 taries, a quantity of text equal to about 150,000 printed pages. The organi-

 zation and structure of the commentaries, given the goal of creating a com-

 puterized text retrieval database, is critical if scholars are to be able to

 search and display this volume of text effectively.


 2.1. Database Terminology  


 Text retrieval databases use common words like ``document'' and

 ``paragraph'' in specific ways that are sometimes different from their usage

 in normal conversation. Here are some of these terms as we use them in

 the project.


 document

 A document is the smallest piece of text that can be loaded into the

 database or retrieved from it. It can be as small as a single word or as

 large as an entire book or article. The documents in a database are

 numbered sequentially, but the document number is used only for

 maintenance purposes and is not seen in most user sessions.


 paragraph

 Each document in the database is divided into one or more paragraphs.

 A paragraph can be any amount of text that has meaning in terms of

 the nature of the documents. It could be a single item such as a date,

 or it could be a lengthy section of text such as a chapter. The para-

 graphs in a document have names such as COMMENTATOR or TEXT.


 subparagraphs

 Paragraphs that contain longer sections of text can be divided into

 subparagraphs. A database subparagraph corresponds to a standard


Dartmouth Dante Project


  6


 paragraph of text in printed documents.


 The terms sentence and word are used in their conventional sense.


 All of these terms are significant when the database is searched. A

 computer program called the database manager searches for occurrences of

 words. Complex searches can be performed by looking for combinations of

 words within a certain proximity. Proximity is measured in terms of docu-

 ments, paragraphs, sentences, and words. Thus a simple single-word search

 will retrieve all documents in which the word occurs at least once. Other

 searches can be more complex. For example, a search might retrieve all

 documents in which a given word occurs in a specific paragraph, or in

 which two words occur in the same sentence, or in which two words occur

 adjacent to each other and in a particular order.


 2.2. Organization of Commentary Text  


 The Divina Commedia, which we often call simply ``the poem,''

 comprises three major sections called cantiche. The three cantiche are

 named Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso. Each cantica is divided into num-

 bered sections called canti. There are 34 canti in Inferno and 33 each in

 Purgatorio and Paradiso. Each canto contains between 115 and 163 lines of

 text, arranged in tercets. In the entire poem there are 14,233 lines of text.

 Since most commentary text refers to specific lines or groups of lines in the

 poem, it is easily keyed to the corresponding text of the poem. A few com-

 mentators also wrote overviews of entire canti or cantiche; these are called

 proemi or conclusioni.


 For the purpose of loading the commentaries into our database, we

 divide the texts into sections that refer to a single part of the poem. The

 part referred to may be a single line, a range of lines, or an entire canto or

 cantica in the case of a proemio or conclusione. This division of

Dartmouth Dante Project


  7


 commentary texts produces database documents that range in size from a

 few words up to several hundred lines. The average size, however, is less

 than 20 lines. Each piece of commentary text becomes the core of a single

 database document. The text is placed into a database paragraph named,

 appropriately, TEXT. If that paragraph is long, it may be divided into sub-

 paragraphs.


 Each document has other paragraphs in addition to TEXT. These

 paragraphs are generally quite short and contain identification and book-

 keeping information. The name of the commentator, the language in which

 the commentary is written, and the cantica, canto, and verses referred to,

 all have their own paragraph in each document. These paragraphs are

 searchable by the database manager in exactly the same way as the text

 paragraph, and it is through such searches that a user of the database can,

 for example, retrieve all comments about a particular line of the poem.


 In addition to searching for words, the database manager can sort

 retrieved documents using the value of any paragraph as the sort key. Each

 document has a paragraph containing the year in which the commentary

 was first published. In this way a user can have his search results

 presented in chronological -- or reverse chronological -- order.


 Finally, each document contains bookkeeping paragraphs that are of

 interest primarily to the project staff. Examples of these are the name of

 the project editor who worked on the commentary, the data entry tech-

 nique used for this commentary, and the date on which the commentary

 was loaded into the database. There is also a paragraph that identifies what

 type of document each is: proemio, conclusione, or regular commentary text.

 This paragraph, which consists of a single letter, tells the database manager

 how to format the document for display on the user's terminal.


Dartmouth Dante Project


  8


 2.3. Stopwords and Abbreviations  


 Not all words of text are useful in searching the database. Common

 words such as articles and prepositions occur so frequently that a search

 for them is useless. Furthermore, every occurrence of every word requires

 a certain amount of storage space in the database indices and increases

 search time. For these reasons the database is designed to ignore certain

 words when it builds its indices. These words are called stopwords since

 they are stopped from being indexed. For the DDP we created lists of stop-

 words for each language we were dealing with: Italian, Latin, and English.


 We have also drawn up a list of abbreviations that occur frequently

 in the commentaries. The database manager uses this list when text is

 loaded into the database. It prevents an abbreviation from being misinter-

 preted as the end of a sentence. This is important for proper formatting of

 the text, but it also means that a user can accurately search for words that

 occur in the same sentence.


 2.4. Character Sets and Terminals  


 Most of the commentary text is in Italian or Latin, and there are occa-

 sional citations in Greek. These languages contain accents and characters

 that are not part of the English-oriented ASCII standard character set

 found on most computer terminals. Many terminals can display only the

 standard set, yet the DDP must allow a user to enter search words and

 must display results. On the other hand, many newer terminals have

 extended character sets that include the non-English characters. Some even

 allow customized character sets to be loaded into the terminal from the

 computer. We also want to take full advantage of these newer terminals.


 Our solution has been to use special 1- or 2-character sequences

 (called escape sequences) to represent the non-standard, non-ASCII

Dartmouth Dante Project


  9


 characters. For example we use the two characters ``@a'' to represent ``a \(ga ''

 (an ``a'' with a grave accent), and the character ``<'' to represent a left

 European quotation mark. Non-standard characters in the original com-

 mentary text are replaced with their escape sequence before the text is

 loaded into the database, so that it is the escape sequence that is actually

 saved. When the text is retrieved from the database, the escape sequence is

 translated into whatever character the present terminal can generate that

 best represents the original text character. To make sure that the escape

 characters do not interfere with searching -- the escape characters often

 occur in the middle of a word -- the database manager is instructed to

 ignore the escape characters when indexing a word. Thus the word ``feli-

 cita \(ga '' would be loaded as ``felicit@a'' in the database text file, but the word

 ``felicita'' would be placed into the index. When displayed on a terminal

 that can generate the accented ``a,'' the word would appear as ``felicita \(ga ,''

 while on a standard terminal it would be simply ``felicita.''


 3. Document Processing  


 This section describes the processing of commentary text from the ori-

 ginal manuscripts to the DDP database. The processing consists of data

 entry, pre-edit text processing, editing, pre-load text processing, and data-

 base loading.


 3.1. Data Entry  


 The printed commentaries on the Divina Commedia range in age from

 a few years to hundreds of years, and several older ones are not available

 in modern editions. The texts have been collected from a variety of

 sources, mainly research libraries, where they were photocopied for entry

 at Dartmouth. Most have been entered by being read by an optical charac-


Dartmouth Dante Project


  10


 ter scanner. Some -- mostly older printings -- could not be scanned and

 were typed in at a computer terminal.


 The DDP uses an optical character scanner called a Kurzweil Data

 Entry Machine, or KDEM. The KDEM resembles a photocopier; there is a

 glass surface on which the manuscript pages are placed. Instead of produc-

 ing a printed reproduction of the page, the KDEM scans the text line by line

 and converts it into a computer file of standard ASCII characters. The

 KDEM is programmed with pattern-recognition algorithms that can recog-

 nize characters in different, often poor-quality print faces.


 During a phase of the data entry process called ``training,'' the opera-

 tor places samples of the text to be scanned on the machine and then

 corrects the machine's initial guesses about what characters its scanner sees.

 A skilled operator can train the machine to recognize correctly almost 100%

 of the characters scanned; the exact percentage depends on the quality of

 the original print.


 After training the machine, which typically takes from several

 minutes to several hours, scanning of the manuscript begins. After a page

 is scanned, the machine displays the text it has read on its console, and the

 operator compares this to the original, making any needed corrections

 before the text file is stored.


 When a sufficiently large volume of text has been scanned, checked,

 and stored on the KDEM, it is transferred to our Unix[1] minicomputer.

 This can be done by writing a 9-track tape on the KDEM or by a direct

 communications channel between the two machines.


 About one third of the commentary manuscripts could not be scanned

 with a high enough accuracy to justify the time required. These

 manuscripts have been typed directly into computer files using conven-


Dartmouth Dante Project


  11


 tional text editors. All typists follow stylistic norms that produce text in

 a format close enough to that produced by the KDEM that it can be pro-

 cessed just as if it had been scanned.


 3.2. Pre-Edit Processing  


 Raw commentary text is processed before being sent to the Dante

 scholars who will edit it. This processing is done on the same minicom-

 puter on which the final database resides. The computer is a Digital Equip-

 ment Corporation VAX 11/785. It runs the 4.3 Berkeley Software Distri-

 bution (BSD) of the Unix operating system. The computer is used at Dart-

 mouth for general academic computing as well as for the DDP. We have

 found the Unix operating system to be particularly well suited to the pro-

 ject. Aside from the fact that our database manager program is Unix-

 based, the system is rich in utilities for text processing. Very little pro-

 gramming has been necessary in the project; most functions have been per-

 formed by combining Unix utilities through the mechanism of shell scripts.


 Pre-edit processing eliminates some of the peculiarities of scanned text

 and produces a good ``rough draft'' format that the editors can handle

 easily. Scanned text often has hyphenated words at the ends of lines; pre-

 edit processing eliminates these and adjusts line length for convenient

 screen editing. The scanner sometimes inserts blanks in places where they

 should not be, such as immediately before a comma. This condition is

 corrected. Similarly, multiple blank lines are collapsed to a single line.

 Finally, the pre-editing script allows an operator to check the rough text

 with a screen editor to catch any problems that the automatic procedures

 miss.


 The pre-edit processing produces files of commentary text that are

 ready for scholarly editing. The files usually contain all of a commentary's

Dartmouth Dante Project


  12


 text on a particular canto of the poem. They typically contain anywhere

 from 50 to 500 lines of text, with an average of about 200.


 3.3. Editing  


 DDP editors are fluent in the language in which the commentary is

 written, and are also recognized Dante scholars. Their function is to

 recheck the accuracy of the commentary text, to ensure uniform citation

 formats, and to make minor corrections in the text. This process is time-

 consuming, and the editors are widely disbursed geographically. For these

 reasons, the editors use personal microcomputers in their homes or offices.

 The computers are Digital Equipment Corporation Rainbows[2]. They run

 the MS-DOS[3] operating system, and the DDP editors use the Final-

 Word[4] word processing program. This word processor was chosen in part

 because it can process the European characters that the Rainbow can

 display.


 Commentary text files are transferred from the Unix computer to the

 editors' Rainbows either by mailing floppy disks or by a direct communica-

 tions link between the Unix machine and the Rainbow. This direct link

 uses a communications program called MLINK[5] that provides error-free

 transmission of text files between computers. When the editors have com-

 pleted a group of files, the edited text is transferred back to the Unix

 machine using the same techniques. Both the downloading from Unix to

 Rainbow and the uploading from Rainbow to Unix are done with semi-

 automatic procedures that handle details such as file name changes, charac-

 ter translation, and logging.




Dartmouth Dante Project


  13


 3.4. Database Loading  


 Commentary text files returned by the editors are essentially in their

 final form, and are ready to be loaded into the database. Our database

 manager is a commercial product called BRS/Search[6]. It is a large set of

 programs that provide sophisticated indexing, storage, and retrieval of text.


 Edited commentary text is prepared for loading into the database by

 adding the database paragraph labels and identification information such as

 publication date, canto number, and poem line number. Pre-load processing

 on the Unix computer provides this information and runs the results

 through a verification program that is part of the BRS system. The

 verification program is a final check that all necessary data is supplied and

 in the proper format.


 The final stage is running the database loader program. It is this BRS

 program which builds the database index and text files. The loader allow

 incremental loading: the database can be built up in small pieces by adding

 to the existing files. It is our practise, however, to load an entire commen-

 tary as a unit. This makes it easier to keep track of what has been loaded

 and also guarantees that the text of a given commentary will be displayed

 in the proper order.


 After each commentary is added to the database, we make archive

 copies of all the database files. This makes it relatively easy to ``back out''

 a commentary if it becomes necessary to reload it for any reason.


 4. Examples from a User Session  


 This section presents some excerpt from an actual user session with

 the Dartmouth Dante Project database. The excerpts illustrate some of the

 capabilities of the database manager program and show how search results


Dartmouth Dante Project


  14


 are formatted. The exact appearance of the session would vary depending

 on the type of computer terminal.


 These examples employ a user interface -- a set of menus and a query

 language -- that are based on a general-purpose interface provided by the

 vendor of the database manager. This is our developmental interface; it has

 not yet been optimized for searching the Dante database.


 4.1. Starting the Session  


 Users of the DDP connect to the computer using standard procedures

 for their terminals and the type of communications they use. They start

 the DDP session by issuing the ``ddp'' command, and the interface first

 displays a list of the material currently loaded into the database. This list

 changes whenever a new commentary is loaded.


   The database currently contains:

   The Divine Comedy
   &
   Full commentaries by the following authors:

   Daniello Pietro di Dante Bosco/Reggio
   Casini/Barbi

 The next screen is the main screen of the interface.


 Current queries:
  None outstanding.

 Enter a search request or option letter (eg Quit, Help, List of options):
  1: 

 The user always returns to this screen between searches and before ending

 the session. The ``Current queries'' list shows the most recent query

 requests during the session. At the numbered prompt the user can enter a

 single letter special request such as ``H'' for HELP screens and ``Q'' to QUIT

 the session, or the user can enter a search request.




Dartmouth Dante Project


  15


 A search request or query is a single word or several words that are

 combined with positional and Boolean operators. The positional operators

 are words such as ADJACENT, NEAR, WITH, and SAME. They specify

 the positional requirement of the text words that are their operands. For

 example, the query ``POSITIONAL WITH WORDS'' would search for all

 documents in which the words ``positional'' and ``words'' occur in the same

 sentence. Searches are case insensitive. The Boolean operators are the usual

 AND, OR, NOT, and so forth. The query can be an arbitrarily complex

 combination of these operators.


 Here is a search query consisting of a single word, ``Virgilio.''


 Enter a search request or option letter (eg Quit, Help, List of options):
  1: Virgilio

 Results are:
  1: VIRGILIO 1640 document(s)

 Enter S to Search; D to Display [D]:

 The display shows that 1640 documents were found that contained the

 word ``Virgilio''. The user has the choice of displaying any or all of those

 documents or ``hits'' or of returning to the main search menu to perform

 another search. For our example we will perform another search.


 Enter S to Search; D to Display [D]: s

 Current queries:
  1: VIRGILIO 1640 document(s)

 Enter a search request or option letter (eg Quit, Help, List of options):
  2: pliny

 Results are:
  PLINY Not in Dictionary 
  2: PLINY 0 document(s)

 Enter S to Search; E to Expand [E]: 

 The display reminds us that the Virgilio search is still remembered. We

 search for ``Pliny,'' but find it does not occur in any document. The choices


Dartmouth Dante Project


  16


 now include expanding on the unsuccessful search word. An expansion is a

 list of several words that would be lexicographically adjacent to the word

 that did not occur. An expansion often shows alternate spellings that do

 occur in the database.


  Expansion on PLINY ...

  Reference 1 --> PLIN    4 document(s)
  Reference 2 --> PLINIO   17 document(s)
  Reference 3 --> PLINIUM    2 document(s)
  Reference 4 --> PLINIUS    2 document(s)
  Reference 5 --> PLOIA    8 document(s)
  Reference 6 --> PLOJA    1 document(s)
  Reference 7 --> PLOR    2 document(s)
  Reference 8 --> PLORA    2 document(s)
  Reference 9 --> PLORABITIS   1 document(s)

  Enter Reference Number(s); H for Help; S to Search [S]:

 The expansion shows four other spellings for Pliny.


 In the next example we will combine the two previous searches. The

 query is for all documents that contain, in the same paragraph, ``Virgilio''

 and any of the 4 different spellings of Pliny. The search query uses a dol-

 lar sign to indicate ``any of the Pliny spellings.''


 Current queries:
  1: VIRGILIO 1640 document(s)

 Enter a search request or option letter (eg Quit, Help, List of options):
  2: Plin$ same Virgilio

 Results are:
  PLIN     4 document(s)
  PLINIO     17 document(s)
  PLINIUM     2 document(s)
  PLINIUS     2 document(s)
  VIRGILIO    1640 document(s)
  2: PLIN$ SAME VIRGILIO   2 document(s)

 Enter S to Search; D to Display [D]: 

 The display includes intermediate search results. There were 25 documents

 with at least one of the spellings of Pliny and (from the previous search)

 1640 documents with Virgilio. Requiring that the two words appear in the


Dartmouth Dante Project


  17


 same paragraph reduces this set to just two documents:


 Enter S to Search; D to Display [D]: d


 Bosco/Reggio (1979), Pur. 26.34 Doc 1, Screen 1

 [Copyrighted Material] schiera bruna: cfr. nigrum... agmen, di Virgilio,
 Aen. IV 404; ma in genere per tutta la similitudine si suole rimandare a
 Ovidio, Met. VII 624-626 e addirittura a Plinio, N. H. XI 39. La
 comparazione dantesca ha pero \(ga un tono diverso, ``poggia... sull'elemento
 affettivo'' (Roncaglia), e indulge meno a effetti descrittivi.


 Enter document number, Help, Search [Next document]: 

 Casini/Barbi (1921), Inf. 24.106 Doc 2, Screen 1

 Cosi \(aa  per li gran savi ecc.: Dante accenna a quello che favoleggiarono della
 fenice i poeti e i dotti dell'antichita \(ga  e del medioevo (p. es. Plinio, H.
 N. X 2, Claudiano, Idil. XLII; rimatori italiani in D'Anc., I 115, 510,
 516 e Val., I 137, 290, 297, II 24, 210, 510; B. Latini, Tesoro VI 26
 ecc.), ma nella sua descrizione egli segue massimamente Ovidio, Met. XV 392:
 ``Una est, quae reparet seque ipsa reseminet, ales: Assyrii phoenica vocant.
 Non fruge neque herbis, Sed turis lacrimis et succo vivit amomi. Haec ubi
 quinque suae complevit saecula vitae, Ilicet in ramis tremulaeque cacumino
 palmae Unguibus et puro nidum sibi construit ore, Quo simul ac casias et
 nardi lenis aristas Quassaque cum fulva substravit cinnama myrrha, Se super
 imponit, finitque in odoribus aevum''. savi: ha detti gia \(ga  Omero e
 Virgilio, Orazio, Ovidio e Lucano (Inf. IV 110). Si confessa: si
 dichiara, si attesta.


 These displays show the formatting of commentary text and also illustrate

 the DDP style of citations. The first document is from the Bosco/Reggio

 commentary, published in 1979, commenting on Purgatorio canto 26, line

 34; the second is from the Casini/Barbi commentary, published in 1921,

 commenting on Inferno canto 24, line 106. The occurrences of the

 searched-for words are highlighted.


 The session ends by returning to the main menu and choosing the

 QUIT option:




Dartmouth Dante Project


  18


 Enter a search request or option letter (eg Quit, Help, List of options):
  5: q

 Enter No to cancel signoff [Signoff]: 
 % 


 5. Future Effort  


 The Dartmouth Dante Project is a work in progress. Our efforts are

 directed toward meeting the original goals of the original project and at

 pursuing some promising new technology.


 Most important is completing the loading of the commentaries. The

 project plan includes 60 commentaries, which are listed in the Appendix.

 They are presently at various stages of processing:


  13 Edited
  11 Being edited
   7 Ready to edit
  11 Entered
  14 Ready to enter
   4 Being prepared for entry

 The most difficult and expensive part of this process is editing the commen-

 tary texts.


 The major computer programming task remaining for the project is

 the design and implementation of a specialized user interface for the data-

 base. The current interface is derived from a general-purpose interface; the

 custom interface will take full advantage of the underlying structure of the

 DDP database. It will support a query language that makes it as easy as

 possible for a researcher to search this particular database, and it will

 present results in the most concise and useful format.


 The database will be available for general use in October, 1988, with

 24 commentaries loaded. When the database opens, we will provide com-

 plete user documentation and administrative support for researchers and

 students. We will also collect all comments both about the database's user

Dartmouth Dante Project


  19


 interface and about the commentary texts. We expect to have completed

 loading of all 64 commentaries by 1991.


 The user interface will be an evolving program, but the commentary

 texts will not be altered during the initial usage phase of the database.

 After the database has been generally available for some time, we will

 review all the editorial and scholarly comments about the commentaries

 and then apply any needed changes to the texts.


 One of the most exciting advances in computer technology today is the

 development of laser disk storage devices. These devices make it technolog-

 ically possible for an institution or even an individual to purchase a desk-

 top computer that contains the complete DDP database and user interface

 program. The BRS text retrieval database used by the DDP is available

 today for desktop microcomputers, and the cost of producing laser disks is

 dropping every year. Exactly how many commentaries would be available

 in this manner depends on copyright arrangements, but at least the earlier,

 uncopyrighted commentaries, which comprise at least 2/3 of the database,

 would be included.


 5.1. Summary  


 The Dartmouth Dante Project, a work in progress, is collecting, edit-

 ing, and making available to students and scholars a substantial number of

 the commentaries written through the centuries about Dante's monumental

 Divina Commedia. Through the use of sophisticated text storage and

 retrieval software and emerging laser disk storage technology, the project

 will make this collection of historic documents available to scholars every-

 where.



Dartmouth Dante Project


  20



 NOTES




 [1] Unix is a trademark of AT&T Bell Laboratories.


 [2] Rainbow is a trademark of Digital Equipment Corporation.


 [3] MS-DOS is a trademark of Microsoft, Inc.


 [4] FinalWord is a trademark of Mark of the Unicorn, Inc.


 [5] MLINK is a trademark of Corporate Microsystems, Inc.


 [6] BRS/Search is a trademark of BRS Information Technologies.



Dartmouth Dante Project


  21



 APPENDIX


 THE COMMENTARIES



 This chart lists the 60 commentaries of the DDP. The first ``tier''

 includes Italian commentaries written before 1900; the second, Latin com-

 mentaries; the third, English; the fourth, Italian commentaries of this cen-

 tury. (N.B. Some dates of publication are approximate.) *An asterisk which

 precedes an item indicates that this text is fully prepared for use as of

 March 1, 1988.


 FIRST TIER (Earlier Italian commentaries)



 *JACOPO ALIGHIERI (1322) (Inferno only)
 *JACOPO DELLA LANA (1324-28)
 OTTIMO (1333)
 *ANONIMO SELMIANO (1337) (Inferno only)
 *GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO (1373) (Inferno: partial)
 FRANCESCO DA BUTI (1385)
 ANONIMO FIORENTINO (1400)
 GUINIFORTO DELLI BARGIGI (1440) (Inferno only)
 CRISTOFORO LANDINO (1481)
 ALESSANDRO VELLUTELLO (1544)
 BERNARDINO DANIELLO (1568)
 LODOVICO CASTELVETRO (1570) (Inferno: partial)
 POMPEO VENTURI (1732)
 BALDASSARE LOMBARDI (1791)
 LUIGI PORTIRELLI (1804)
 *PAOLO COSTA (1819)
 ROSSETTI (1826) (Inferno & Purgatorio)
 NICCOLO \(ga  TOMMASEO (1837)
 RAFFAELLO ANDREOLI (1856)
 LUIGI BENNASSUTI (1864)
 GREGORIO DI SIENA (1867) (Inferno only)

Dartmouth Dante Project


  22


 BRUNONE BIANCHI (1868)
 G. A. SCARTAZZINI (1900)
 GIUSEPPE CAMPI (1888)
 GIOACHINO BERTHIER (1892)
 GIACOMO POLETTO (1894)


 SECOND TIER (Latin Commentators)



 GRAZIOLO DE' BAMBAGLIOLI (1324) (Inferno only)
 ANONIMO LOMBARDO (1324?) (Purgatorio only)
 GUIDO DA PISA (1327) (Inferno only)
 *PIETRO DI DANTE (1340)
 CODICE CASSINESE (1350?)
 BENVENUTO DA IMOLA (1373)
 JOHANNIS DE SERRAVALLE (1416)


 THIRD TIER (English Commentators)



 H. OELSNER (1899)
 H. F. TOZER (1901)
 *JOHN RUSKIN (1903)
 J. S. CARROL (1904)
 C. H. GRANDGENT (1909)
 CHARLES S. SINGLETON (1970)


 FOURTH TIER (Modern Italian Commentators)



 FRANCESCO TORRACA (1905)
 CARLO STEINER (1921)
 ENRICO MESTICA (1921)
 *CASINI/BARBI (1921)
 ISIDORO DEL LUNGO (1926)

Dartmouth Dante Project


  23


 SCARTAZZINI/VANDELLI (1929)
 CARLO GRABHER (1934)
 ERNESTO TRUCCHI (1936)
 DINO PROVENZAL (1938)
 LUIGI PIETROBONO (1946)
 *ATTILIO MOMIGLIANO (1946)
 MANFREDI PORENA (1946)
 *NATALINO SAPEGNO (1955)
 DANIELE MATTALLIA (1960)
 SIRO A. CHIMENZ (1962)
 GIOVANNI FALLANI (1965)
 *GIORGIO PADOAN (1967) (Inferno I-VIII)
 GIUSEPPE GIACALONE (1968)
 *BOSCO/REGGIO (1979)



Dartmouth Dante Project


