Return-Path: Fillia.S.Makedon@Dartmouth.EDU
Received: from dartvax.dartmouth.edu (dartvax.dartmouth.edu [129.170.16.4]) by avalon.dartmouth.edu (8.7.3/8.7.3) with ESMTP id PAA28000 for <steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu>; Tue, 15 Oct 1996 15:50:17 -0400
Received: from cupid.Dartmouth.EDU (cupid.dartmouth.edu [129.170.208.8]) by dartvax.dartmouth.edu (8.7.6+DND/8.7.3) with SMTP id PAA10671; Tue, 15 Oct 1996 15:49:55 -0400 (EDT)
Message-id: <24647491@cupid.Dartmouth.EDU>
Date: 15 Oct 96 15:49:26 EDT
From: Fillia.S.Makedon@Dartmouth.EDU (Fillia S. Makedon)
Subject: dante proposal updated
To: Walter.E.Stephens@Dartmouth.EDU (Walter E. Stephens),
        bobh@phoenix.Princeton.EDU
Cc: Charles.B.Owen@Dartmouth.EDU (Charles B. Owen),
        makedon@cs.dartmouth.edu (Fillia S. Makedon),
        Otmar.K.E.Foelsche@Dartmouth.EDU (Otmar K. E. Foelsche),
        steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu (Stephen Campbell),
        scot@cs.dartmouth.edu (Robert L. Drysdale),
        Debra.Whiting@Dartmouth.EDU (Debra Whiting)


Dear Robert, Walter, Otmar and Steve,

Charles and I have made some updates to the proposal and I would appreciate it
if you took a quick look at it. In particular, please look at the section
entitled "Impact to students".  We need to list courses and specific ways that
this site could be used by students and describe how it will improve their
comprehension and learning.

As I said before, I am leaving tonight for a conference and will be back
Sunday.  I would like to have this information from you so that we can submit
it. It would be helpful if the faculty in Dartmouth's French and Italian
Literature department could write and include a brief enthusiastic letter of
support.

Thanks, 

Fillia
***********
The "Teaching Dante" Website :
CREATING A WWW TEACHING RESOURCE ON DANTE 

Faculty :
Fillia Makedon, Project Director
Associate Professor of Computer Science
The Dartmouth Experimental Visualization Laboratory
makedon@dartmouth.edu
  WWW:  http://devlab.dartmouth.edu/

Walter Stephens, Principal Faculty Advisor of Project
Professor of Italian Language and Literature

in cooperation with:
Faculty in the French and Italian Department

Technical Webmaster:
Charles Owen, Computer Science

Dartmouth Resource Consultants:
Baker Library Technical Staff
Steven Campbell, Kiewit Center
Otmar Foelsche, Language Resource Center
Janet Stephens, Dante Project Expert

External Domain Expert Consultant
Robert Hollander, Professor
Princeton University

ABSTRACT
We propose to create an interactive and highly usable World Wide Web resource
for teaching undergraduates using the Dante Project materials.  The Dante
Project is a collection of  text including and related to the Divine Comedy of
Dante Alighieri.  It was a project funded by a large NEH grant with development
taking place at Dartmouth College.  Over 70 commentaries are included in this
collection as well as the original text of the entire Commedia.  The Dante
Project is available at Dartmouth College as part of the Online Library system
and on the Internet using a cumbersome telnet interface.  It is primarily a
search facility, difficult to interact with, and without browsing facilities. 
The Dante project  predates the development of the World Wide Web (WWW), a
global mesh of iterconnected multimedia resources.  

The goal of this proposal is to bring the Dante Project resources to the World
Wide Web.  As computer scientists, we view the Dante collection as appropriate
for applying tools we have developed because it contains a large amount of
highly valuable materials which are: (a) already digitized,  (b) not currently
on the web (not globally available), and  (c) in a form that is difficult to
use, not interactive and not aesthetic. For example, we wanted to browse text
around all locations where the word "purgatory" appears and it was not possible
to do so with the current system.

We propose to create an easy-to-use teaching resource that not only
incorporates the existing digital information in a totally new format, but also
extends it with additional capabilities. We will call the outcome the Teaching
Dante Website using the DEVLAB's powerful new multimedia authoring system
called ASML (Automatic Site Markup Language), an extension of HTML.  In this
new form,  for example, students will be able to locate all the exact
particular locations in a text where a word appears, relate these locations via
a graphical (navigational map viewer), cut and paste information to create new
web information, add annotations, incorporate information in other media such
as images or audio clips or even video clips of someone lecturing on a
particular part found in the text.  

To obtain an idea of this user interface, one can look at our newly-created
website on the Aegean [http://devlab.cs.dartmouth.edu/bronze/]. 

WEBSITE ADVANTAGES OVER THE CURRENT FORMAT

A WWW based presentation (i.e., website) of the Dante Project has many distinct
advantages over the current system.  The web is a global document delivery
system with transparent  support on all common personal computers including
Macintosh, Windows, and Unix.  It is a user friendly environment which presents
material in a highly formatted form with hyperlinking (=non-sequential
referencing or linking) to related resources.  

The existing Dante Project user interface is optimized for researchers, not for
students nor as a teaching resource.  It presents  two interfaces, a
proprietary interface for Dartmouth students and a terminal based interface for
Internet users.  Each interface supports only the search of information and
presents the information in text form.  No paths to related components can be
followed, nor can the teacher assign new paths of exploration for each class. 
There is no support for simple browsing of entire documents.  A new WWW based
presentation of this material will be much more usable by casual users such as
students desiring enhanced understanding of the text.

The Dartmouth Experimental Visualization Laboratory (DEVLAB) has developed high
performance tools (see section on ASML below) for searching and browsing
content on the World Wide Web.  The material can be presented in a highly
readable form with commentary directly associated with the text of the poem. 
For example, a student will be able to click at a particular location in the
poem, and a series of commentaries can appear by date or other type of request. 
In addition to the translation of existing materials to the WWW, we propose to
gather, capture and incorporate new materials to enhance the project.  For
example, a way to give more dimensions to the material and bring them to life
is to add audio and video from Dante researchers and teachers to the web site
to put a human feel on the commentary.  Images of Dante library materials such
as text pages and image collections will be researched and added to the
collection.  The site can also include links to other existing Dante resources.   

OTHER DANTE WEB SITES

There are several Dante related projects already in existence on the World Wide
Web.  None of these sites includes any substantial amount of scholarly
information; they are either presentations of the text or focus on some related
issue such as printed versions of the text.

The largest of these, the IL Tweb Digital Dante Project at Columbia University,
[http://ilweb.columbia.edu/projects/dante/], has presented the text of the
Commedia in side-by-side Italian and English using the Longfellow translation
(1867).  The site includes over 200 images by Botticelli, Dore, and others. 
There is also a small amount of additional scholarly material including a few
chapters of selected works from class notes.  It lists excerpts
 from five books of commentary but these are typically only 2-3 chapters.  The
site technically minimal, utilizing a  typewriter font for text alignment
rather than more advanced HTML features.  It does have a basic search engine. 

Other sites include  Renaissance Dante in Print (1472-1629) at the University
of Notre Dame [http://www.nd.edu/~italnet/Dante/].  This site is presented in
association with the Newberry Library and is focused on historical printed
editions of the Divine Comedy.  It does include some informational pages about
Dante.  

Many Italian works including the La Divina Commedia and La Vita Nuova by Dante
are available as Italian text only at the Centre for Advanced Studies,
Research, and Development in Sardinia
[http://www.crs4.it/HTML/Literature.html]. 

DanteNet at Princeton [http://www.princeton.edu/~dante/] is the electronic home
for the Dante Society of America.  This site simply provides an electronic
bulletin board set up by Professor Hollander or a place to put new commentary
material on-line. It is not a teaching resource per se but could easily be
incorporated into one, provided one has the computer programs to automate and
classify different types of information, such as the DEVLAB has.

What exists on the web does not approach the depth of the Dartmouth Dante
Project collection.  The site we propose to develop will have a depth of
commentary and support of resources that is much greater than other sites.

IMPACT ON STUDENTS AND COURSES

Dante materials are used by a series of courses in French, Italian, Latin and
English Literature classes.  We will start by working with Professor Walter
Stephens who will guide us as to the most necessary features lacking from the
current system, namely easy to use, portability on several types of machines,
greater ability to communicate with scholars outside of Dartmouth, more
powerful features for browsing, searching and cataloguing the commentaries
through time, and the incorporation of visual materials and possibly audio.  

COOPERATION WITH DOMAIN EXPERTS

In order to succeed in our efforts, we will work together with domain experts
from  the Dartmouth College French and Italian Literature department.  They
will guide us as to what user interface will be best in order to make this
website a valuable teaching resource at Dartmouth and elsewhere.  Domain
experts assisting with this effort will include Professor Walter Stephens who
will be our primary link to the rest of the department and who now teaches
Dante in his class.  In addition, Professor Robert Hollander from Princeton
University who was the PI of the Dante project, has agreed to work with us and
said that it would be very valuable to put the existing information onto the
web.  

TECHNICAL TRACK RECORD 

The DEVLAB has had extensive experience working with the humanities and in
particular the development of websites.  We have worked extensively with the
Foundation of the Hellenic World (FHW) which is creating the largest known
museum multimedia resource center on the history of Hellenism (from 7,000 BC to
present) that will exist-both physically and virtually--in a very large space
in Athens, Greece, with on-line links to Hellenic resources around the world. 
Fillia Makedon has worked as the senior scientific research scientist for this
foundation advising them as to how to link digital information with exhibits,
and on multimedia products.  While the goal of many current on-line exhibits
might be to "virtually repatriate" historical documents and thus provide links
across the world, access to web information within the FHW center's walls and
vis-a-vis an artifact will provide additional "restoration" of the object, and
links "across time".  The foundation plans to link Hellenic testimonies and
collections to their temporal element of history (Chronos), to their place or
origin (Topos) and to their current physical space (Horos).  By linking
artifacts scattered around the world, it aims to bring history to life.  It is
also exploring innovative ways of integrating established museological
conventions to such a center and bring together a convergence between museums,
libraries, laboratories, classrooms, and the entertainment world
<http://www.fhw.gr>. 

In addition, the DEVLAB has been involved in copyright issues involving images
of ancient artifacts found in museums. Fillia Makedon is presenting an invited
talk at the WEBNET'96 conference in San Fransisco (October 16-19).  DEVLAB
researchers are also doing basic research in image analysis of video,
compression, retrieval of multimedia data, digital video processing and
annotation.  A recent project, jointly with the MIT Media Laboratory and Boston
University, is to automate the analysis of American Sign Language as captured
on video, locating the moving components of a facial gesture.  

In this section, we simply outline some of the previous work we have done.  The
record speaks for itself and so we simply list the URL addresses of our
websites. 
1.  	The Devlab website
	http://devlab.dartmouth.edu/  
 
2. 	On the Prehistoric Archeology of the Aegean
	 http://devlab.dartmouth.edu/history/bronze_age/ 

3.  	On the ASML  language
	http://devlab.cs.dartmouth.edu/asml/

	4. 	On Image Tcl: system for processing fast video data					
http://devlab.dartmouth.edu/imagetcl/

	5. 	Website on Ancient Olympic Games
		http://devlab.dartmouth.edu/olympic/


POWERFUL TOOLS:  AUTOMATIC SITE MARKUP LANGUAGE (ASML) 

ASML is a new markup language for site level design of WWW sites.  Developed at
the Dartmouth Experimental Visualization Laboratory (DEVLAB), ASML is a
powerful tool for the design and development of complex sites like that
proposed for the Dante Project.  ASML development has been supported by grants
from the Dartmouth College Venture Fund and the Foundation for the Hellenic
World.

Traditional approaches to the creation of large and complex World Wide Web
sites is hampered by the "page at a time" approach of many tools and the
programming knowledge and custom software development required for automated
solutions. Automatic  Site Markup Language (ASML) is a new markup language
designed to automate the construction of World Wide Web (WWW, the Web) sites. 
It is designed to centralize functionality in order to decrease duplication of
effort and to supplant most uses of scripting languages in web site
development.  It has already been utilized to construct a large historic site,
The Prehistoric Archeology of the Aegean as well as many smaller projects at
the Dartmouth Experimental Visualization Laboratory (DEVLAB), including the
ASML pages themselves.
PROPOSED WORK SPECIFICS
1.  Jointly with faculty from the French and Italian Literature Department, we
propose to create a "Teaching Dante" website based on the Dante Project
materials with several extensions and appropriate for classroom instruction
features.  This website will be also a global teaching resource suitable for
use by:
 	(a) students
	(b) scholars and faculty
 	(c) librarians 

2. In addition to the end result, the teaching Dante website, this project will
facilitate the use and extension of ASML, a Dartmouth system for authoring on
the web that was developed at the DEVLAB with Venture funds during the summer
and fall of 1996.   Using ASML, students and faculty will be able to author and
incorporate new materials to the resource without needing to know much
programming and without using Perl scripts.

3.  The website will include the following additions:
	a. more commentaries that are recent or links to them;
	b. appropriately placed links to new websites that have been developed
since the Dante 		Project began;
	c. an easy to use tutorial on ASML authoring language;
	d. images, graphics, audio and video clips, as deemed appropriate by
the faculty of the 		French and Italian Literature department;
	e. A textual open-ended database of images associated with the text;
	f. An easthetic database;
	g. Mechanisms to filter out information, to cluster related data,
navigation procedures that 		are transparent to the user, and
ability for teacher to monitor usage of the text in an 		easy to use
way.
4. Update the Dante Project information on sources and copyrights and make this
information visible on the website to all.

FUTURE WORK

We plan to apply for a renewal of this grant application the following year.
During the second year, we propose to extend this website with the following:
1. additional audiovisual content
2. links to copyright information and update
3. a feature to define personalized paths of exploration by the teacher
4. a virtual rolodex feature to allow students to exchange comments based on
who viewed a particular part of a commentary.
5.We will incorporate into the website some graphical navigational aids
(graphical viewer) that will help the student cataloque comments in a personal
file, trace his/her previous searches and communicate with the materials in a
friendly way.
6. We plan to work with domain experts to see how we might incorporate the use
of audio clips or audio in general and possibly images of the commentators.

PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND PERSONNEL

Fillia Makedon, director of DEVLAB, will be the project director
Walter Stephens will be the Dartmouth domain expert who will give us insight
into the design of the user interface of the website for teaching purposes. 
Charles Owen is a full time Ph.D. student who is the DEVLAB "webmaster" and
main architect of ASML.
Content and website coordinator: a 12 hours/per week person to collect,
integrate and archive resources.  Part of his/her task will be to trace
copyrights and to contact new sources of content, such as multimedia data
gathering (images, audio, graphics, video)
Four students:
Two student programmers, one for the database of the multimedia data and
another to incorporate this data into ASML code for the web.
These students will also capture, scan, digitize and process additional
multimedia information involving images, graphics, audio and video

One student in Italian literature 
	a. to trace and research other sources and update the current 	
materials in the Dante Project.
	b. to link to the Italian dictionary
One student to program the development of an interactive glossary specific to
the content and linked with the content.

RESOURCE CONSULTANTS

(1) Stephen Campbell has the technical expertise to help us identify the
digital sources of the commentaries.
(2) Otmar Foelsche, Director of the Language Resource Center, will assist us in
supervising two students in linking the Dante Project materials to an Italian
dictionary that exists in digital form.
(3) Janet Stephens will assist us as an external consultant in identifying the
location of some of the materials.
(4) Additional assistance will be obtained from experts in the Baker Library.


BUDGET

Four students working 10 hours per week for 3 terms, as outlined above:
	$7/hr x 10 hours/wk x 10 weeks/term x 3 terms = $2,100
	$2,100 x 4 students = $8,400

Content and Website Coordinator: Collect and update content, incorporate text
into ASML, clear copyrights, maintain student hours, maintain project progress.
	$8/hr x 12 hrs/wk x 4 wks/month x 12 months = $4,608 
		subtotal: $13,008

Disk space (large amount of memory is needed) to store the website information
= $700
Supplies, rental of audiovisual equipment, scanning materials and copying costs
$250
Copyright permission and communication costs $250
Audiovisual supplies for capturing and collecting additional information (audio
and video commentaries, feedback from students incorporated into the website)
$250
Consulting/travel fees (Professor Hollander) $400

Total   $14,858

Note: matching funds: the DEVLAB equipment dedicated to this project (scanners,
computers, printeres, etc. estimated at $20,000.


