	Dartmouth Dante Project

Longfellow (1867), ^Pur~. 1.1                     Doc 1 of 3, Screen  1

The Mountain of Purgatory is a vast conical mountain, rising steep and high    
from the waters of the Southern Ocean, at a point antipodal to Mount Sion in   
Jerusalem.  In Canto III. 14, Dante speaks of it as                            
                                                                               
                                 "The hill                                     
     That highest tow'rds the heaven uplifts itself";                          
                                                                               
                                                                               
and in ^Paradiso~, XXVI. 139, as                                               
                                                                               
     "The mount that rises highest o'er the wave."                             
                                                                               
                                                                               
Around it run seven terraces, on which ^are~ punished severally the Seven      
Deadly ^Sins.~  Rough stairways, cut in the rock, ^lead~ up from terrace to    
terrace, and on the summit it the garden of the Terrestial Paradise.           
                                                                               
The Seven Sins punished in the Seven Circles are, -- 1.  Pride; 2. Envy; 3.    
	Dartmouth Dante Project

Longfellow (1867), ^Pur~. 1.1                     Doc 1 of 3, Screen  2

Anger; 4. Sloth; 5. Avarice and Prodigality; 6. Gluttony; 7. Lust.             
                                                                               
The threefold division of the Purgatorio, marked only by more elaborate        
preludes, or by a natural pause in the action of the poem, is, -- 1. From      
Canto I. to Canto IX.; 2. From Canto IX.  to Canto XXVIII.; 3. From Canto      
XXVIII. to the end.  The first of these divisions describes the region lying   
outside the gate of Purgatory; the second, the Seven Circles of the mountain;  
and the third, the Terrestrial Paradise on its summit.                         
                                                                               
     "Traces of belief in a Purgatory," says Mr. Alger, ^Doctrine              
     of a Future Life~, p. 410, "early appear among the                        
     Christians.  Many of the gravest Fathers of the first five                
     centuries naturally conceived and taught, -- as is indeed                 
     intrinsically reasonable, -- that after death some souls                  
     will be punished for their sins until they are cleansed, and              
     then will be released from pain.  The Manichaeans imagined                
     that all souls, before returning to their native heaven,                  
     must be borne first to the moon, where with good waters they              
	Dartmouth Dante Project

Longfellow (1867), ^Pur~. 1.1                     Doc 1 of 3, Screen  3

     would be washed pure from outward filth, and then to the                  
     sun, where they would be purged by good fires from every                  
     inward stain.  After these lunar and solar lustrations, they              
     were fit for the eternal world of light.  But the conception              
     of Purgatory as it was held by the early Christians, whether              
     orthodox Fathers or heretical sects, was merely the just and              
     necessary result of applying to the subject of future                     
     punishment the two ethical ideas that punishment should                   
     partake of degrees proportioned to guilt, and that it should              
     be restorative.....                                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
     "Pope Gregory the Great, in the sixth century, -- either                  
     borrowing some of the more objectionable features of the                  
     Purgatory-doctrine previously held by the heathen, or else                
     divising the same things himself from a perception of the                 
     striking adaptedness of such notions to secure an enviable                
     power to the Church, -- constructed, established, and gave                
	Dartmouth Dante Project

Longfellow (1867), ^Pur~. 1.1                     Doc 1 of 3, Screen  4

     working efficiency to the dogmatic scheme of Puratory ever                
     since firmly defended by the Papal adherents as an integral               
     part of the Roman Catholic system.  The doctrine as matured               
     and promulgated by Gregory, giving to the representatives of              
     the Church an almost unlimited power over Purgatory, rapidly              
     grew into favor with the clergy, and sank with general                    
     conviction into the hopes and fears of the laity."                        
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
