Return-Path: steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu
Received: from avalon (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by avalon.dartmouth.edu (8.8.4/8.8.5) with ESMTP id KAA18837;
	Mon, 12 Jan 1998 10:13:56 -0500
Message-Id: <199801121513.KAA18837@avalon.dartmouth.edu>
To: bobh@phoenix.Princeton.EDU (Robert B. Hollander)
cc: Malcolm.Brown@Dartmouth.EDU, tobypaff@PUCC.PRINCETON.EDU,
        Bob.Brentrup@Dartmouth.EDU, steve
Subject: comms to edit
In-reply-to: Your message of "Sun, 04 Jan 1998 13:19:08 EST."
             <199801041819.NAA15712@phoenix.Princeton.EDU> 
Reply-To: Stephen.Campbell@Dartmouth.EDU
Date: Mon, 12 Jan 1998 10:13:50 -0500
From: Stephen Campbell <steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu>

Bob said:

> There
> are now some 2000 individual errors that I have record
> of, and I have five commentators ready to be entered:
> Andreoli (not yet loaded)
> Chimenz
> Sapegno
> Steiner
> Pasquini/Quaglio

Folks,

On alexandria.Dartmouth.EDU in the home directory of user dante are these
subdirectories:

Archives
Commentaries
Commentaries.new
Commentaries.ng

(Note that these are all symbolic links to directories in /agate.)

All of these directories contain some version of the text of the commentaries.
Archives contains old versions of some comm text. Commentaries contains (to a
close approximation) the text that went into the last load of the database in
1991. Commentaries.new contains text of new (not yet loaded) comms and new
parts of some loaded comms. All of these directories have read-only 
permissions; we should not alter any files in these directories. 

Commentaries.ng (ng = next generation) is a new directory in which we should
start assembling the text for the next database load. Text in here may be
copied from one of the other directories. Text in here may be edited to
correct errors on older versions. All files in Commentaries.ng are writeable
by user dante and by other users in the Unix group named dante.

I have populated Commentaries.ng with the text of the 5 comms Bob mentions in
his message quoted above. Some of the files are compressed (ie end in .Z);
some are not. I have used the "note" command located in ~dante/bin to create
or update the HISTORY files in these directories. Bob, this is where you can
start applying corrections. You can use the uncompress command where needed.

Note that these directories are NOT backed up routinely like some file systems
are. As things stand today, if we accidently destroy a file in
Commentaries.ng, we lose any changes we have made to that file. Maybe Bob
Brentrup and I can arrange backups.

PLEASE NOTE: My biggest concern as we start this process is that we will not
be able to keep track of what changes have been made to what files and what
changes have not been made. We have several lists of needed changes: Bob has
his own; there are lists of Typos in the Commentaries and Commentaries.new
directories; I have a folder of several dozen email messages going back to
1993 containing notes about needed corrections. Keeping track of all this is
what Janet did, and to my knowledge no one is doing it now. I think it is
imperative that anyone making any changes in Commentaries.ng document it
fully using the "note" command. If we don't solve this problem, we will miss
some fixes.

Bob, when you have spent an hour or two editing these files, please call me. I
would like to go over the procedures you are using, even if you think they are
working fine. I may be able to make the job easier/safer. Let me know when you
need more comms brought into Commentaries.ng.

							Steve
