Return-Path: Robert.J.Brentrup@Dartmouth.EDU
Received: from mailhub.dartmouth.edu (mailhub.dartmouth.edu [129.170.16.6])
	by avalon.dartmouth.edu (8.8.4/8.8.5) with ESMTP id JAA23678
	for <steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu>; Mon, 9 Feb 1998 09:49:06 -0500
Received: from dancer.Dartmouth.EDU (dancer.dartmouth.edu [129.170.208.7])
	by mailhub.dartmouth.edu (8.8.8+DND/8.8.8) with SMTP id JAA26994;
	Mon, 9 Feb 1998 09:49:00 -0500 (EST)
Message-id: <52969471@dancer.Dartmouth.EDU>
Date: 09 Feb 98 09:49:00 EST
From: Robert.J.Brentrup@Dartmouth.EDU (Robert J. Brentrup)
Subject: Re: Dante Project query
To: kirk@princeton.edu
Cc: steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu (Stephen Campbell),
        information-systems@alexandria.dartmouth.edu

--- You wrote:
  2) We have been poking recently at the limited access capability
that has been built at Dartmouth for accessing some of the
Dante material via the Web:  
http://dciswww.dartmouth.edu/cgi-bin/dcis/wdi?&Alexandria.Dartmouth.EDU&51001&Da
rtmouth%20Dante%20Project&s   
Again, we are wondering both how queries are formulated here, whether
these are documented and whether this is an ongoing effort that
will likely be extended.  We would consider linking our project
to this one if the search capabilities (via URL) are strong enough.
--- end of quote ---

Hi,
	Steve Campbell forwarded your message and asked me to respond to the
question about the web interface to Dante.

	We are supporting a number of other BRS databases on the web and tried
to incorporate the Dante database too.  We plan to maintain and improve the web
interface to DCIS.  There are a couple of issues that need to be addressed to
make the Dante database work reasonably on the DCIS interface.  Some
modifications to the Dante database or our software (or possibly both) could be
made to improve access to the Dante database.  Obviously we need to understand
Bob Hollander's objectives for a web interface too.

	The basic keyword searching functionality of DCIS supports most of the
capabilities of BRS.  DCIS has tried to abstract the search language from the
underlying database because it works with several other engines too, so the
search expressions need to formulated somewhat differently from BRS commands. 
The basic functionality of the interface is documented at:

http://www.dartmouth.edu/~library/infosys/dciswww/dcishelp.html

	Using this information and some knowledge of the search fields, one can
express the same kinds of queries documented in the "Dartmouth Dante Project
Searchable Database User's Guide".  The line search is the major exception.  A
database specific help page explaining the DANTE search fields could be added
to the DCIS interface which would help new users.

	The line search of the telnet interface relies on a field added to each
record that encodes the language, cantica, canto number and line number in a
compact form.  The language, cantica name and canto number are also available
in text form and can be searched from DCIS in that way by "anding" 3 terms
together (though not as efficiently).  However the line numbers are not readily
accessible for the last term needed.  It is possible to get a similar effect
with a truncated search on the coded field, but this is both inefficient and
opaque to most users.  Either DCIS has to be extended to provide similar front
end processing of the line search from an enduser (which we have not done
because this is the only database in the collection that needs this capability
and is a non trivial modification) or this coding needs to be redesigned to be
allow more direct enduser use of this information.  For example a field
containing only the list of line numbers.

	The other issue with the database is the encoding of non-ASCII
characters and typographic highlights in the data.  An SGML entity encoding for
the extended character set would fit with current practice in the e-texts
field.  DCIS is using SGML entities in a number of similar databases.  The
typographic highlights could likewise be defined using SGML tags.  Otherwise a
custom procedure is needed in the software to convert the database's current
encoding to HTML on display.

	Please let me know what else you are thinking are the "limitations" of
the current system.  We would also be interested in knowing how you were
planning to approach a web interface to the Dante Project.  Happy to continue
this conversation by phone as would be useful to you.

Robert Brentrup
Director, Information Systems
(603)646-1413

	
