Return-Path: Robert.J.Brentrup@Dartmouth.EDU
Received: from mailhub.Dartmouth.EDU (mailhub.dartmouth.edu [129.170.16.6])
	by avalon.Dartmouth.EDU (8.9.3/8.9.1) with ESMTP id KAA18101
	for <steve@avalon.Dartmouth.EDU>; Tue, 25 Jan 2000 10:53:57 -0500 (EST)
Received: from vixen.Dartmouth.EDU (vixen.dartmouth.edu [129.170.208.15])
	by mailhub.Dartmouth.EDU (8.9.3+DND/8.9.3) with ESMTP id KAA10644;
	Tue, 25 Jan 2000 10:52:57 -0500 (EST)
Message-id: <28440775@vixen.Dartmouth.EDU>
Date: 25 Jan 2000 10:54:04 EST
From: Robert.J.Brentrup@Dartmouth.EDU (Robert J. Brentrup)
Subject: Re: DDP troubles
To: kirk@Princeton.EDU
Cc: bobh@Princeton.EDU, steve@avalon.Dartmouth.EDU (Stephen Campbell),
        Robert.J.Brentrup@Dartmouth.EDU (Robert J. Brentrup),
        Malcolm.B.Brown@Dartmouth.EDU (Malcolm B. Brown)
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/enriched
Content-Disposition: inline

Hi,

	I've had a look around at the Princeton Dante Project web site using Steve's
account. The DCIS team was unaware that you had reformatted the results pages
coming from our system for use in yours.  It seems from Kirk's description that
you made use of the comment markers we had provided on the result pages for our
own use for similar purposes.  For various reasons we had decided to solve this
problem in a different matter and have removed these markers from the redesigned
version of our system which obviously caused problems for you.  It seems that
you have in the meantime adapted for the most part to our revised web pages. 
The one remaining problem I saw overlapped our database and copyright
description with the header graphics from your site.  Though I can guess that
there may be some other elements you'd rather not currently include (for example
our green function buttons and check boxes on the records?).  We certainly can't
promise that we will not be changing our interface in the future.  Since we
hadn't looked at the previous setup, it would be most helpful now if you could
explain what you would be planning to do next if we did nothing else to our
present system.


	I have discussed some of the technical issues of providing results from our
system for use by yours with the DCIS programmers.  As I mentioned above, we
have developed another approach to building a customized web site around results
retrieved from a DCIS database.  We are recommending that we use this code to
set up a custom view of this database for your use, one that would leave off of
the results pages the header graphics and other end user functions and links of
our standard interface.  With a few URL changes you could alter your system to
make use of this view and probably eliminate the code you have for finding and
removing these elements yourselves.  Your code could continue to add your own
header and footer HTML elements to these result pages.  Such a custom view
should not be perturbed by our continuing work.  If this sounds to you like a
workable way for us to collaborate, we will implement this view ASAP and provide
documentation on how to use it.


Thanks,

Bob Brentrup
