Return-Path: LBIANCHI@Sol.YorkU.CA 
Received: from sol.yorku.ca by avalon.dartmouth.edu (5.65/DEC-Ultrix/4.3)
	id AA21911; Fri, 12 Feb 1993 12:09:31 -0500
Received: from Sol.YorkU.CA by Sol.YorkU.CA (PMDF #12410) id
 <01GUMTB1OUW08YBA8D@Sol.YorkU.CA>; Fri, 12 Feb 1993 11:57 EDT
Date: Fri, 12 Feb 1993 11:57 EDT
From: Luigi M Bianchi <LBIANCHI@Sol.YorkU.CA>
Subject: Comments and Thanks
To: steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu
Cc: bobh@baker.dartmouth.edu
Message-Id: <01GUMTB1OUW08YBA8D@Sol.YorkU.CA>
X-Envelope-To: steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu
X-Vms-To: IN%"steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu"
X-Vms-Cc: IN%"bobh@baker.dartmouth.edu"
Status: OR


Dear Steve,

	I have started using your generous list.  It is really of great help
especially because it enriches the one I am putting together with material
I wouldn't be able to find elsewhere: literary, scholarly, 'danteschi' terms
that will make it useful perhaps also for checking scholarly texts.

	There is a bit of editing to do: Latin and German words which I must
eliminate.  Luckily I know enough of both languages to make the task easy.

	I also realize I found some misprints, but they may have crept in
from other 'ingredients' I merged with your list.  In case however they are
from your list (and I'll check the 'original' first), I'll send you a list
of them when I'm done, so that you may use it to touch up the texts stored
at Dartmouth.

	My project is going ahead, although not as speedily as I was dreaming.
It's a long process.  I forgot to tell you that I have set up an anonymous
FTP area on two machines at York, where I upload the work in progress, so
that it may be freely available to everybody as it gradually reaches its
'final' form.  Here is the FTP address:

			SOL.YORKU.CA  or ORION.YORKU.CA

(usual anonimous login applies).  The letters already finished are: A, B, C,
D, E, F, G, H, J, K, Q, U, W, X, Y, Z.  So far only 'G' benefits from your
list.  The other letters where finished earlier (and will be updated at the
end).  The format is either UNIX (tarred-compressed) or MSDOS (pkzipped).
Although the filenames are not as smart as I would like (the VAX system
does not like '.' or '_' in filenames), small DOC files describe the
contents of the various items available.  Please feel free to help yourself
and to let others know.  When the work is finished I will submit it to
SIMTEL-20, GARBO, and possibly other well-known sites.

	Thank you again for your invaluable help and support.  Full, formal
acknowledgment of it will appear with due prominence in the final version.
I have already taken the liberty of doing so informally on the Italian
newsgroup.

	Cordially yours,

--Luigi

